---
title: Human, all too human
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [schizophrenia, history, medication, essay]
---

Dementia praecox, now known as schizophrenia, is one of the greatest burdens on health systems today. Yet schizophrenia basically tells us what it means to be human. The schizophrenics I’ve met have been empathetic, sincere but vulnerable, lost souls. To get closer to the root of the problem we’ll want to take a closer look at some history and compare it to the current state-of-the-art in the treatment of schizophrenia and the treatment of the schizophrenic themselves.

Defined by Emil Kraepelin late in the nineteenth century, dementia praecox was distinguished from manic-depression (which included unipolar and bipolar depression) as one of the psychoses. The fundamental difference between these two conditions was whether the psychosis was mood congruent, in the case of manic-depression, or mood incongruent, in the case of dementia praecox. The diseases also had different courses which was a huge discovery in terms of mental disorders and some suppose that Kraepelin’s dichotomy between the differing psychoses still holds. In terms of manic-depression the disease was typically episodic. While back in the days of Kraepelin dementia praecox was signified by the functional decline of the psyche that was thought irreversible. Two different courses but similar symptoms. However, these days there’s also an ‘in between’ diagnosis called schizoaffective disorder which is basically what you get when you staple schizophrenia (dementia praecox) and bipolar disorder (manic-depression) together and breaks the concept of Kraepelin’s dichotomy.

What’s curious about the initial classification of dementia praecox was the huge number of symptoms. Alogia, avolition, aporia, analgesia, aboulia, anorexia, asthenia, amenorrhoea, and apophany, …, and that’s just a few that start with ‘A’! Eugen Bleuler in his redefinition of dementia praecox as schizophrenia basically suggested the distinctive characteristic of the disease could be surmised in the four A’s: blunted Affect (by which there was a diminished emotional response to stimuli), loosening of Associations (now known as derailment), Ambivalence (the inability to make decisions), and Autism (a loss of awareness of external events and a preoccupation with the self and one’s own thoughts).

Curiously enough, the initial classification of schizophrenia by Bleuler focused mostly on negative symptoms of schizophrenia which I still think holds true today. The modern four A’s are athymia (blunted affect), avolition-apathy (aboulia), asociality-anhedonia, and alogia (poverty of speech), though I can respect Bleuler’s initial definition particularly in regards to his four A’s. The four A’s mostly focus on a sort of cognitive deficit which have been apparent across the history of schizophrenia even after effective treatment was found for positive symptoms.

One of the curious changes in the course of history of schizophrenia was the introduction of Schneider’s ‘first-rank symptoms.’ Bleuler says:

> The fundamental symptoms consist of disturbances of association and affectivity, the predilection for fantasy as against reality, and the inclination to divorce oneself from reality.

While Schneider’s fundamental symptoms include: auditory hallucinations (considered one of the hallmarks of a schizophrenic today), thought insertion, thought broadcasting, thought withdrawal, passivity experiences, and delusional perceptions.

As opposed to today’s fundamental symptoms, which are mostly based around Schneider’s first-rank symptoms, I think it’s sad that schizophrenia’s initial list of a fundamental symptoms rings so true for me. I feel like I was lost in time, a product of another age, yet I still feel that a lot of people feel that Bleuler was right and Schneider wrong. That Schneider’s symptoms are just byproducts of the fundamental symptoms that Bleuler laid out. I think schizophrenia is an illness of myth and historical forgetting, propagated by movies and mass media. It’s only when you look at it as it evolved over time do you see where it warped and shifted into the weird psychosis-based diagnostic criteria we have today. Psychosis is the extreme but there’s something more fundamental that feeds the psychosis, something more sinister.

Schizophrenia was lost for a time with the rise of Freud. Psychoanalysts apart from Jung were terrified of schizophrenia and in 1914 Freud had noted of schizophrenics:

> Patients of this kind … display two fundamental characteristics, megalomania and diversion of interest from the external world—from people and things. In consequence of the latter change, they become inaccessible to the influence of psychoanalysis and cannot be cured by our efforts.

What a statement! Basically throwing the schizophrenics out on the streets, or more appropriately, leaving them in their homes. With a ‘diversion of interest from the external world’ this damning statement shows exactly what people used to think made schizophrenia tick. I think it holds very true even today. Which is shocking. For all intents and purposes schizophrenia has become diagnosed using psychosis-based criteria because that’s what our drugs are most effective at treating, or that’s what I suppose anyways. It’s these insidious negative symptoms of schizophrenia and the thought disorders apparent in schizophrenia, which is almost a disease of language, that truly affects the schizophrenic’s ability to process the world and the psychosis is merely a byproduct of this disease process. A ‘diversion from the external world’ rings so true, again and again. Freud knew exactly what was wrong except didn’t have the treatment techniques to relieve symptoms. An absolutely horrid statement for its exclusion of the schizophrenic as ‘subhuman’ but absolutely beautiful for its insight. Thanks Freud, I guess.

Notably there have been advances in schizophrenia as a concept. Out with the subtypes they said. In the latest diagnostic criteria, the DSM-V and ICD-11, the subtypes of schizophrenia have vanished. No longer is one classified into one of paranoid schizophrenia, disorganised schizophrenia, catatonic schizophrenia, undifferentiated schizophrenia, residual schizophrenia, or so on. These labels were too readily changed over time as more information and data points were added to a schizophrenic’s case. Ultimately with effective treatment all schizophrenics become residual and that’s exactly what happened to me. I was effectively treated with a handsome course of antipsychotics leaving me with negative symptoms of schizophrenia which have remained untreated to this day. I think it’s the reconceptualisation of schizophrenia from a disorder of a ‘diversion of interest from the external world’ to one of psychotic breakdowns and scary hallucinations and delusions that have caused a lot of people to miss the point entirely. It’s all too late when people start having psychotic breakdowns to treat them. That’s the terrible part of this history. We had such good descriptions for what made schizophrenia tick, and which could diagnose someone schizophrenic before the worst occurred. Yet we’re still stuck in this ‘worst-case scenario’ mindset because schizophrenia is so stigmatised and so ill-conceived in today’s world. Again I use the phrase ‘raving lunatic’ to capture the public’s image of schizophrenia when it’s sadly so far from the truth. If only more schizophrenics could tell their story. Their heart-wrenching, devastating stories. Yet the academics sit in their ivory towers with higher-ups determining what’s the most threatening aspects of schizophrenia to the public. Naturally we live in a world of fear, when all the schizophrenic needs is a world of love and nurturing. Perhaps, just perhaps, then the schizophrenic will leave their artificial reality behind and join all of us in the world again.

From the 1950s onwards with the discovery of antipsychotics the horrible history continues in terms of schizophrenics being considered vending machines. Put antipsychotics in and receive a calmer individual out. But there’s something more fundamental that I think psychiatry is missing. It’s this sense of disconnection, inwards facing thoughts and feelings, lost in a world of your own design. This is what frustrates me about the conceptualisation of schizophrenia throughout the ages. We had it so on point, our initial classifications thought about the root cause rather than the byproducts of the disease process. These days, as I said, we’re vending machines and now we have more sophisticated control techniques like fortnightly to monthly injections of antipsychotics. It’s this sense of control that reassures the public but leaves the schizophrenic thinking all their liberties have been taken away from them.

Which has pretty much been schizophrenia’s course in history. People locked away in asylums, getting the exact opposite treatment to what they need. Yet still, even with outpatient programs in today’s day and age where the schizophrenic gets some semblance of autonomy back the treatment just isn’t there. I’m incredibly fortunate to be linked into a psychosocial support program for example. But it’s a time-limited service and I basically have to ‘get my shit together’ before my time with them runs out. The pressures to recover are real in a world that seems to be moving ever so fast. I want a world where I have a sense of control. When I lose that control I shy away and regress into negative symptoms of schizophrenia, though that’s just my symptom profile. Some might go the opposite way and be engulfed by positivity like hearing voices or becoming delusional which I did for a time. What I really need to do is sit down with a trained psychiatrist and pick their mind for what they think makes schizophrenia tick and why our current treatment plans seem to be lacking. However, the public system definitely doesn’t accommodate high-functioning schizophrenics such as myself that want to get to the root cause of the problem. That want to have their voice heard.

We’re treated by the lowest-common denominator, a worst-case scenario sort of deal. It’s fear from the public system that persists my injections of antipsychotics and my healthy dose of pills in the form of additional antipsychotics and mood stabilisers. The alternative choice to having my injection? Hospital. Hospital is where you’re effectively incarcerated and all your liberties are taken from you. All sense of control gone. It’s a scary place even though they look more like hotels than prisons these days. The impression that we’re ‘helping’ these people is in the decorations. But when do we consider someone incapable of making decisions on their own? That’s a good question. Hospital, and losing all liberties, is actually an upshot from the fatigue, homelessness, and starvation a lot of schizophrenics face on the outside; which is unfortunately all too common. I’m incredibly fortunate to have a loving family that supports me through the disease process, even if sometimes we haven’t been the best off. I can’t imagine living on the streets because the system has failed me, to be a ‘tag and release.’ That is a vagrant that comes and goes in and out of hospital for a brief moment of respite.

What’s fascinating about schizophrenia however is that it attacks exactly that which makes us human. All too human. Are we any less human for having the essence of what it means to be human taken from us? Or are we more than human for being so vulnerable, so empathetic, so sincere? I for one feel the energies of the world assault or soothe me day to day. It might sound a little spiritual but at this point it’s my best description for the hypersensitivity to an environment that a schizophrenic experiences. It’s as if we have no filter, some might say a ‘sensory gating deficit.’ All I know is that it can be hell when your temperament is solely determined by shifts in weather, season, population density, traffic, or most importantly the shifts in the temperament of others. We feel it all. Every smile, every tear, every scowl, it hits far too close to home. Perhaps we’re more human than we initially think.

Which is sad in a sense because as I’ve tried to learn in my nearly thirty years of experience is that a lot of other people have boundaries, barriers, facades, a distance that tends away from others to protect their ego and sense of self. I don’t believe schizophrenics have this. Or if they do it’s maladaptive coping mechanisms such as the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. That’s perhaps one of the contributing factors to a schizophrenic’s vulnerabilities, this inability to protect one’s sense of self. Not only is the external world fragmenting this sense of self, literally what it means to be human, but schizophrenia is almost like an autoimmune disease in that the self attacks the self. In extreme cases this comes about as hallucinations and delusions, which are actually far less prevalent than in the movies. But the big question in this essay is how does schizophrenia relate to human history, our sense of self, and ultimately the human condition?

A schizophrenic’s functional decline might be all too much for most people to watch because it exemplifies what it means to have your humanity taken away from you. The public is scared of this degeneration into madness. I just don’t know a good way out. Sure, we need help but are our current methods up to scratch or do they just remove the parts of the schizophrenic that are too much for society to handle? Is it a life worth living? One filled with no positive symptoms of schizophrenia, such as hallucinations and delusions, but filled with negative symptoms of schizophrenia such as Bleuler’s four A’s or the modern four A’s previously mentioned. Are the negative symptoms of schizophrenia a part of the disease process or the natural symptom profile of a ‘lost soul.’ Is schizophrenia essentially a ‘disease of the soul’?

The simple fact is that this is a problem of perhaps being ‘too human.’ Too vulnerable, too empathetic, too sincere. That yearning to feel connected and being left outside in the rain. Looking through the window at the happy family eating around the dinner table. Wanting something more, wanting something real. Instead having to concoct your own reality where perhaps it doesn’t hurt as much, or maybe it hurts more but at least you feel alive. There’s no simple answer to feeling different, there's no simple answer to being ‘too human.’

