---
title: A Schizophrenic's Apology
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [schizophrenia, essay]
---

Schizophrenia is the archetypal mental disorder. Its wide spectrum of symptoms ranging from the positive (hallucinations, delusions, and disorganised thinking) to the negative (alogia, abulia, asociality-anhedonia, and athymia) create a gamut that is the perfect case study for a disease of the mind and soul. Many other mental disorders such as bipolar disorder share characteristics with schizophrenia, for example they are both psychoses, but none strikes at the core of a human being as much as schizophrenia does.

Hopes, dreams, wants, ambitions. All are lost when subjected to the insidious nature of schizophrenia. You can put on a brave face for those around you but inside you’re dying. People might think you’re high functioning, that it’s possible to be normal again. After going through a series of psychotic episodes, ranging from non-bizarre to bizarre delusions, you change. You’re left a hollow man where ego death has destroyed your sense of self and you have to rebuild from square one again. In my own instance it was having to rebuild my social skills, and frankly my entire life perspective, after four years of isolation in my room. Schizophrenia does something to the mind that leaves you quirky and eccentric but in the end sometimes you can use this to your advantage.

I’m a thinker, I love to play with ideas. Toss them about, weigh their worth, some might even call me witty or intelligent. Left in my room for four years I had a lot of time to myself. Some ideas such as the fact that I thought immortality and ascension were real and that I had to figure out how to ascend or fade into nothingness were frankly bizarre. That women were omniscient and could read minds was another weird idea. That sleep was akin to death so I would go a few days to a week without sleep. What actually got me hospitalised though was trying to dismantle the world’s religions with a secular religion of my own. All from my room I was left in a dream state, neither awake or asleep. It’s all a blur now because of the trauma inflicted on my soul. When every waking moment is a fight for survival you change. Change for the worse.

What’s always been crushing about my illness is how much it affects the soul. I like to think that willpower, reason, character, feeling, consciousness, memory, perception, and thinking are all faculties of the mind and soul. All of these faculties of the mind and soul tend to shut down from negative symptoms of schizophrenia and this is what people don’t understand. The positive symptoms of schizophrenia were scary and traumatising for sure, but the negative symptoms of schizophrenia are subtle and pervasive. They creep into every aspect of your day to day life. Making sure everything is a struggle. Making sure it’s uphill, both ways. Schizophrenia is a disability and should be regarded as such. That’s the position I want to defend here.

Negative symptoms of schizophrenia especially disconnect you from the world. That love and warmth you felt from your family, that happiness and kinship you felt from your friends, your connection to the world and everything as a whole, gone. You stare at a beautiful sunset and feel nothing. You see your friend in the street and feel nothing. It’s this constant disconnect that can lead to every more so disabling depressions. Not that one has a mood disorder, they just can’t handle the fact that avolition and asociality have set in. Not that you notice these facts at face value but something inside you just knows that something isn’t quite right.

I think that’s the defining characteristic of negative symptoms of schizophrenia versus depression. Depression you choose to not interact with people, you can feel your body give way and the low energy set in. A schizophrenic though will unconsciously avoid people and they don’t actually realise it’s amotivation that’s set in. You don’t realise you’re moving slower, and you don’t realise there’s a thirty second delay in your responses. It’s as if depression is a subjective illness while schizophrenia is objective. You need a third-party to note that you’re not doing so well. The schizophrenic can be likened to a frog being slowly boiled alive in water. However, schizophrenics typically don’t have full-blown symptoms continuously but periods of remission.

What’s confusing for some people though is that there are periods of remission. For example when I was attending university I was medication free and loving life. I was tutoring classes of students and giving presentations without anxiety. These days I could probably manage such a demanding workload for a month or two before I regress to severe negative symptoms of schizophrenia. These periods of remission give people hope but here’s the disabling fact about schizophrenia: you never know when your symptoms are lurking around the corner.

Like everyone else, schizophrenics have good days and bad days. They are incredibly vulnerable people that don’t take the pressures of everyday life well. Family, friends, acquaintances, strangers, all have a huge impact on a schizophrenic’s perception of the world and their place in it. The negative symptoms of schizophrenia are such that we yearn for human contact but once we get it we shy away. This is a natural reflex to being isolated for so long that we just can’t handle all the going ons and happenings of real human contact. I for one can manage online interactions easily but get me in a room with a few people and I start good but eventually begin to shut down.

After fighting for fifteen years I’m losing, or have lost, the will to go on. Time and time again I’ll get back on my feet and time and time again I’ll have my soul crushed. I think overall I’m more sensitive to the world’s energies than others and they affect me greatly. Anything could send me into an episode of negative symptoms. Be that an alcoholic wreck of a mother, visiting my brother in juvenile detention, stress at university or work, physical sickness or disease, or the more benign cycle of negative symptoms coming and going that I’m all too familiar with.

If nothing changes, the cycle happens every six months. Three months of severe negative symptoms and three months of recovery before relapse. It’s infuriating to say the least and makes it impossible to hold a job. What I’m trying to get at here is that even with my cycles and symptom profile, and supposedly being a high functioning schizophrenic, I find the condition utterly disabling. I’m lucky though because I have a good support network around me which relieves the symptoms to an extent. Still, life is a continuous struggle for all involved, my support network, my friends, my family, and myself.

One thing I find unsettling is that even when symptoms are in remission they’re still lurking there, ready to flair up when the opportunity arises. Right now I’m restless because I want company but I know I can’t handle having to try and explain and prove myself. So I use writing as a medium to convey an idea to the world, including myself, without having to interact with others. It’s cathartic even to just get some ideas on paper. Still, it frustrates me greatly that I never seem to convey the essence of what it’s like to live with schizophrenia. When you get weird stares after pouring your heart and soul into a conversation or piece of writing just for some temporary relief from your symptoms the silent treatment makes you wish you didn’t even bother.

All in all, schizophrenics are just vulnerable people that have been subjected to ongoing trauma where my own stem from a prolonged period of isolation and loneliness. I’m still picking up the pieces from having my soul destroyed many years ago and I don’t think I’ll ever be able to glue the pieces back together so it all looks good as new again. I am a broken man, but I think that’s where the charm lies. If I was to ever find love, I don’t think I could love someone that was perfect. I love abusing my latest addictions be that drinking, smoking, video games, have at you. The comorbid substance abuse disorder is enough to put anyone off, let alone the schizophrenia. Sometimes I don’t think I can be loved. After dying inside so many times before I don’t think I can even love myself, or feel loved, or love another. That’s the challenging thing about the situation and I think just might be the essence of the problem at hand. That I want to love and feel loved except the trauma of my experiences make it so that I retreat or unknowingly push people away when love is on offer.

I’ve had many loves in fact. Beautifully broken people. I relish in the fact that my true loves, be that friends, family, or significant others, were as damaged as I was. Yet given my symptom profile they seem to handle life a lot better than I do. As I said, my vulnerabilities leave me disabled when facing the world. I can’t imagine a normal life again. Work and play seem like distant dreams. Just feeling like a part of a greater whole seems a distant memory. Eating and sleeping, the ability to nourish and sustain myself, also seem like unattainable goals. Sleep is all but too elusive and my motivation is absent leading to me going hungry rather than preparing meals. Yet somehow there’s a flicker of hope, I continued on despite adversity. Why? Why would someone persist in the face of such calamity? Because it’s not just about me. I mean a lot to a lot of different people. To end it all would be selfish. If there’s something I pride myself on it’s my ability to empathise with others, perhaps too well.

Residual schizophrenia mocks you every moment it can. It takes away exactly that which makes someone human and replaces it with nothing. I’m drawing on all my willpower right now, however much that may be, to persist, to continue on. The schizophrenic experiences horrors the likes no normal man should possibly be subjected to. I just want to write about my story, but my memory fails me. The memories come back in fits and starts. Nothing coherent, nothing linear. It’s as if my true self got lost in time. Now there’s just a bitter husk. I didn’t want it to end like this, living out my days with no love or warmth, not because of an absence of such things but just because I can’t feel them anymore.

It’s bleak, and I don’t think I’ll ever be wholly satisfied. Brief moments of respite perhaps, but I’ll never be whole, and that’s okay. It’s okay that I’m suffering, it’s okay that I’m not ‘normal.’ Most importantly I still exist and therefore there’s hope for the future. I don’t have high hopes but hope nonetheless. Something really weird about my condition is the abstract thinking and the existential crises. I get caught in a world of my own design where right now I’m struggling with the transitory nature of existence. The finitude of existence contrasted with the infinitude of space and time leaves me in despair. But again, even that’s fleeting so I wouldn’t pin it down as a mood disorder. The exact nature of my wildly fluctuating moods is quite bizarre. One second I’ll feel the top of the world, the next I’ll be in a pit of despair. One constant is that I don’t sit in a state of equilibrium for long unless I’ve got a flow going. The flow of writing for example is bliss, it’s probably why I like to write so much.

So where does that leave me? Negative symptoms of schizophrenia, elevated and depressed moods, substance abuse, anxieties, obsessions, depersonalisation, and if I wasn’t on so many antipsychotics I could only conclude delusions. Hearing voices was never a thing for me though I’ve had visual hallucinations once or twice though they’re not core to my case. Supposedly not hearing voices makes me a half-baked schizophrenic though I’d like to intrude on that thought and say negative symptoms of schizophrenia are the actual defining characteristic with positive symptoms being what dresses schizophrenia up and makes it ‘look pretty.’ To that end, rehabilitation is key. When you first get a schizophrenic who has come out of their first psychotic episode you’re usually dealing with a train wreck. For myself that was years of isolation that had negatively affected the way I think and do. No longer could I go outside and be a member of society. No longer could I hold a stable conversation without tangents into asinine topics filled with loose associations. No longer could I survive without abusing substances. It’s taken ten years after the acute phase of my schizophrenia for me to get my life back together again so I can string some coherent thoughts together, so that I can go outside with assistance, so that every waking moment isn’t trying to get my next fix.

Basically, the idea behind this apology was to reinforce that schizophrenics, possibly more than anyone else, need company. They need an extraordinary amount of help just to get to baseline again after being ravaged by the effects of the disease process. We have effective treatment for the positive symptoms of schizophrenia but the treatment for negative symptoms of schizophrenia are lacking. It requires a robust team of mental health professionals including psychiatrists, psychologists, and psychosocial support workers for there to be any hope of recovery.

But recovery isn’t linear. There will be tangents and steps backwards and that’s just something everyone on board has to understand. Some days I’ll sleep for twenty-four hours. Some days I’ll be awake for forty-eight hours. Some days I won’t eat. Some days I’ll eat too much. Some days I’ll get completely wasted off alcohol, which only adds to the problems. Some days recovery seems possible. Some days recovery seems but a distant dream. It’s all these conflicting pressures that not only affect your thinking but your mood that are the crux of the issue at the end of the day. But there’s hope, there’s always hope, and that’s what everyone in the support network, including your friends and family, have to remember when push comes to shove.

We’re vulnerable people. We need to be taken care of. We can’t fend for ourselves. There’s a big, scary world out there that seems like it’s out to get us. I’m extraordinarily lucky that I’ve regained some of my wits and intelligence after a shocking three year stint of psychotic symptoms. It’s taken ten years to recover to the point I’m at now but I feel like I’m stronger than ever to take on the pressures of everyday life. I want to be a success story. I don’t want this disease to beat me. If there’s one thing to take home from this all, it’s that I didn’t have a choice. This is the hand I was dealt and I’ve had to deal with it. Despite being vulnerable, a bit moody and temperamental, and overall what appears like a lazy and ungrateful person, I’ve pushed on despite the struggle and I would like to call myself a fighter. I hate to admit every bit of this but I’ve finally had to accept that I’ve had a lot of trauma throughout my life and that’s left me exposed to the world. That on top of the prevailing negative symptoms of schizophrenia has left me exhausted.

It’s a constant battle, but a battle I’m willing to fight. Sure I’ll need a lot of concessions along the way while I get my shit sorted. Still, it’s finding the right balance of pressuring me out of this chapter of recovery and into a chapter of recovered. Though for all intents and purposes it doesn’t seem like there’ll ever be a ‘recovered chapter.’ More likely than not it’ll be a constant struggle to survive and some part of me is saying ‘that’s okay.’ But what I want most out of life is to be loved, and to love another. But that’s all a distant dream because I know I’m not capable of love. Schizophrenia’s effect on the brain leads to a disconnect from everything, including your sense of self. As previously mentioned you have this constant disconnect and when you do get a brief moment of respite it all comes flooding back. Your sense of connection, your sense of self, your ability to love. The end result: you end up going back into your shell without realising it. Finding love is a game, a game schizophrenics weren’t meant to play. Even the word ‘schizophrenia’ scares potential matches away when you have to break it to them. There’s still a lot of stigma out there for this poorly understood disease and that’s another facet of the argument in this apology.

The word ‘schizophrenia’ means a lot of different things to a lot of different people. I’ll give the benefit of the doubt to people to know it’s not multiple personalities. But I’m inclined to believe they think schizophrenics are raving lunatics, or psychopaths, or capable of murder. Schizophrenics, from my point of view, are people disconnected from reality. Which for most purposes is benign when it involves other people. Your more likely to come across a psychopath than a schizophrenic because the schizophrenic is huddled away at home, unconsciously mind you, because the world is against them. They don’t have the motivation or the means to interact with the world. They don’t know that they’re going under. They’re oblivious to their own illness and think that any quirks are merely personality rather than a disease process.

I’ve fortunately become intimately aware, through a lot of help from my support services, that I’m undergoing a disease process. Unfortunately that doesn’t make me any better at taking medication or taking on the support offered. To me the medication doesn’t make a difference, to others they notice a world of difference. Which is cruel in a sense. If there’s one thing I needed more than anything it would be compliance. Just to get me to baseline at least. You get yourself into situations where you don’t think you’re sick, but when you try to do something it all comes back. Striking at the core of your being.

Schizophrenia is a debilitating disease process that strikes at the core of your being. It truly is a disability in which the only hope of recovery is through family, friends, and a healthy support network. It cuts off your connection with the world and takes away all your hopes, dreams, wants, and ambitions. Yet, there is hope for recovery. It’s this hope that must be planted within all schizophrenics if they are to successfully live the rest of their lives. From my point of view a lot more trauma counselling is in order, and less emphasis on medication and more emphasis on giving the schizophrenic doses of company they can handle so that they may reintegrate with society. Schizophrenia above all is an integration disorder. A disorder that disconnects and only a sense of connection will begin to relieve the symptoms.

