---
title: Am I mad or depressed?
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [schizophrenia, depression, medication, humanity, essay]
---

What separates depression from the negative symptoms of schizophrenia? A question I’ve never been able to get a good grasp of, perhaps until now. Let’s explore what makes depression and negative symptoms of schizophrenia tick. Why are most schizophrenics who ask for help initially diagnosed depressed? How can these two conditions be comorbid and how do they play on each other? And, how do these conditions play into the human condition? A lot of questions and hopefully we’ll find some answers.

Depression is an incredibly common mental disorder. Major depressive disorder, the most severe form of depression, affected 3% of the world’s population in 2015. That’s just people currently affected, with lifetime rates being between 10-15% depending on if you live in a developed or developing country; surprisingly you’re more likely to get depression in a developed country. The most common time of onset is in a person’s 20s and 30s. Females are affected twice as often as males. But what is depression? From the ICD-11, the latest diagnostic manual for psychiatry internationally, we find:

> A depressive episode is characterized by a period of almost daily depressed mood or diminished interest in activities lasting at least two weeks accompanied by other symptoms such as difficulty concentrating, feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt, hopelessness, recurrent thoughts of death or suicide, changes in appetite or sleep, psychomotor agitation or retardation, and reduced energy or fatigue.

Schizophrenia on the other hand is a less common, but an equally disabling, mental disorder. Schizophrenia, the most severe of the psychotic disorders, affects roughly 1% of the world’s population. Prodromal phase symptoms (think initial negative symptoms but with no psychosis as of yet) usually has an onset years before the ‘psychotic breakdown’ takes place. An example would be prodromal symptoms starting at the age of 14, and a psychotic breakdown beginning at the age of 18. Schizophrenia curiously affects more males than females with males having an earlier age of onset around 18-21 while females have a typically later onset between the ages of 25-30. But what is schizophrenia? From the ICD-11 again we find:

> Schizophrenia is characterized by disturbances in multiple mental modalities, including thinking (e.g., delusions, disorganization in the form of thought), perception (e.g., hallucinations), self-experience (e.g., the experience that one's feelings, impulses, thoughts, or behaviour are under the control of an external force), cognition (e.g., impaired attention, verbal memory, and social cognition), volition (e.g., loss of motivation), affect (e.g., blunted emotional expression), and behaviour (e.g.,behaviour that appears bizarre or purposeless, unpredictable or inappropriate emotional responses that interfere with the organization of behaviour). Psychomotor disturbances, including catatonia, may be present. Persistent delusions, persistent hallucinations, thought disorder, and experiences of influence, passivity, or control are considered core symptoms.

From those descriptions of the illness we find that the difference is in the emotional content. “Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt, hopelessness, recurrent thoughts of death and suicide…” are the markers of depression while for schizophrenia we have “disturbances of association and affectivity, the predilection for fantasy as against reality, and the inclination to divorce oneself from reality.” From this we can gather that a depressed individual is ‘there’ but with a persistent low mood while someone suffering from schizophrenia is ‘not there,’ in a sense, with disturbances to mood, or in the case of negative symptoms, diminished expression. From experience, negative symptoms and depression seem to feed off each other so a differential diagnosis seems to be in order most of the time. Is it the symptoms of schizophrenia creating a secondary depression or is it the symptoms of depression fueling a secondary psychotic episode? Never self-diagnose and always consult a trained therapist such as a psychiatrist to make this differential diagnosis possible.

It’s also not surprising that prodromal phase schizophrenia can so easily be mislabeled. Depressed episodes are common in teenagers which is prime time for the prodromal phase of schizophrenia to begin, at least for males. Given their outwards appearing similarities and other complications going on in a teenagers life it’s far too easy to prescribe an antidepressant and call it a day. It requires a skilled professional to do the differential diagnosis and even then they don’t always get it right. A schizophrenic might say “I just feel different from my peers.” That’s all you’ve got to work with, no wonder it’s so hard. If I had to state what made my prodromal phase schizophrenia different from depression is the absolute destruction of functioning I witnessed. Schizophrenia just destroys any capacity to go on. It’s unfortunately a slow functional decline but if help is sought early perhaps one can actually avoid the, what seems these days, inevitable psychotic breakdown. Avolition I would say is the main contributing symptom to this functional decline and hopefully more scales of assessment for negative symptoms are used in teenagers to identify the problem early and link them up with early intervention services.

The state-of-the-art in terms of negative symptoms is that they fall into two main clusters. That of diminished expression (reduced behaviours related to the expression of emotion) and avolition (loss of behaviours, interests, motivations, and desires). These clusters can further be split into domains. Diminished expression has two domains: athymia (reduced expression and range of emotional expression shown in verbal or non-verbal modes of communication), and alogia (reduced quality of speech and loss of conversation fluency). Avolition can be split into three domains: amotivation (deficits in the initiation and maintenance of goal-oriented behaviours), anhedonia (impaired anticipation of reward), and asociality (diminished interest in social interactions with others). That’s a lot of A’s! We’ll call the five domains of negative symptoms the “Five A’s of schizophrenia.”

Negative symptoms have a huge impact on social functioning for the schizophrenic and persist throughout the lifetime of the illness because of inefficacy of drugs to treat them. However, psychosocial support is efficacious and leads to real recovery. Psychosocial treatment revolves around education, psychotherapy, behavioural training, and help with employment, housing, and family relations. Psychosocial treatments offer reassurance, morale building, companionship, commonsense advice, and help with practical problems. Families can also seek therapy to avoid both confrontation and emotional distancing. It’s as if in the case of depression and schizophrenia we do have mostly effective drug therapy with a good prognosis given effective psychosocial support. In both disorders it’s as if it’s a sense of disconnection and lack of love and nurturing that is the root cause with different manifestations. In the case of depression we have feelings of worthlessness, hopelessness, excessive or inappropriate guilt, while for schizophrenia we have a loss of control and a withdrawn state from reality. The depressed individual has low mood, the schizophrenic is hiding. Both can occur at the same time.

What’s interesting is that the drugs don’t work forever and can actually be a hindrance after prolonged use. It’s now known that ‘work functioning’ actually stays relatively low over time if antipsychotics are continuously prescribed with those going off antipsychotics after the acute phase of their illness seeing real gains in work functioning. Naturally I’m not saying drugs aren’t effective, I’m just saying they have their time and place and shouldn’t be so readily prescribed for decades on end. They’re a band-aid solution that doesn’t help the root cause of the problem. Someone has to come to the schizophrenic individual and ask the right questions and genuinely listen to their problems. I want to go off the drugs. The drugs don’t seem to work anymore, if anything they’re making things worse.

It’s fear, propaganda, and honestly stigma, perhaps even a culture, that fuels the drug industry to keep people on these medications for life. Psychosocial treatment seems like the only way out, but even they could use improving. What we need are all-in-one psychosocial solutions who are on the field and visiting the person in question. Not only helping with the practicalities of the matter such as employment, housing, and family relations, which ‘feels’ paternal in nature, but also offering something maternal like reassurance, morale building, and most importantly companionship. I’ve been in one of these programs for years and honestly the focus has shifted from walks and chit-chats to pushing for the practical problems to be solved. Why can’t we have both? There has to be a happy medium that feels like a wholistic psychosocial treatment program.

Importantly though, what does this say about the human condition? That sure, there’s a time and place for the mentally disordered person to have the practical problems assessed but at the end of the day they need nurturing, soothing. There’s something about the human condition that some people can’t handle, most importantly this emotional distance that people seem to erect like a wall around themselves. The mentally disordered person from experience is truly empathetic and vulnerable because they don’t have that emotional distance. They pour their heart and soul into the world and they don’t feel they get a whole lot back. I’ve tried to reach out again and again, not for help, but for a feeling of comradery. For people to join a cause that’s trying to make the world a better place. Yet given the nature of my condition all I can manage is sitting behind a computer writing inane essays.

It’s curious though how this fundamental problem of disconnection manifests itself as not so much widely differing diseases but at least different labels. Bipolar disorder, anxiety, schizophrenia, dissociative identity disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and substance abuse disorder are just a few, and sorry if I left your diagnosis out. What these disorders really exemplify is what it means to be human. To make matters worse they can be comorbid not only with each other, like with depression and schizophrenia, but with physical illnesses as well such as diabetes. Complex issues affecting the whole body require wholistic solutions. Unfortunately it’s all too common to be thrown between disparate support services such as the case with mental health issues and drug abuse issues. Each service has their ‘opinion’ of what’s the problem. For mental health services they use the archaic model sometimes that there’s a chemical imbalance in the brain. These days they just tell people to “suck it up.” For drug and alcohol services they think it’s all about trauma and developing a window of tolerance. Each of the services have their place but there’s no one at the end of the day teaching you how to create a complete picture out of these disparate services. You feel thrown around, worn out, and out of place because there’s so much happening, so many opinions, and it’s all a bit too much.

We’re all broken in some sense. I’ve only met a few people that appear like they’ve ‘got it together,’ but even then I feel if I got to know them better the facade would let up. People who talk openly about not only their physical but their mental health I feel are strong. They’re fighters trying to make the world a better place. Trying to establish that sense of connection between the masses. That’s my goal anyhow. I want a better world for all, though I’m not saying it’ll be easy or that I expect everything to be perfect as I see fit. What I’m trying to say is there’s a lot of conflicting opinions on how the world should work. Lots and lots of conflicting opinions. There’s a lot of issues out there and I don’t think there’s any easy solution. What I pride myself on, though I don’t think I’ve conveyed it properly through my writings because it’s such an elusive topic, is trying to understand the human condition. I’m trying to understand what gives that rhythm and beat to the world we live in. Maybe I’m selfish and I’m just in it to relieve my own symptoms. Maybe I’m not and I’m actually in it to ‘stick up for the little guy.’ Why not a bit of both? The world isn’t cut and dry, black or white.

Am I mad or depressed? Does it really matter? Why not a bit of both? I’m past the point of drugs having much efficacy, and I’ll be damned if I’m on them the rest of my life. But treatment plans change slowly, diagnoses change over time, what you may have been presenting with ten years ago can be a whole lot different to what you’re presenting with now. We change as people, fundamentally change over time. We’re not static but dynamic, though that sense of self and consciousness wants to tell us the opposite. We need to get back to business but at the same time we need to realise this is a community effort. Only then can there be some healing. What I want to conclude with is that we’re human, all too human. In saying that I want to break down walls, not erect them. It may sound a bit cliche but I’m leaving myself vulnerable here telling my story and my thoughts. Yet I’m still lost in a world of my own design, a world I’m trying to deconstruct and move on from. I figured I could only do that by writing about it. It seems I have a lot to say about my condition.

# Further Reading
* [Major depressive disorder - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Major_depressive_disorder)
* [Negative Symptoms and Cognitive Impairments in Schizophrenia: Two Key Symptoms Negatively Influencing Social Functioning](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6015796/)
* [A 20-Year Multi-Followup Longitudinal Study Assessing Whether Antipsychotic Medications Contribute to Work Functioning in Schizophrenia](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5661946/)
