---
title: Frontier Psychiatry
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [psychiatry, schizophrenia, recovery, essay]
---

I’ve been chemically restrained. I’ve had my liberties taken away from me. I’ve been stigmatised and considered a madman. “Take out your shoe laces and take off your belt,” they said as I walked into an adult psychiatric ward for the first time at the age of seventeen. I shuffled around the small open area of the ward. Trying to not have my now unlaced shoes fall off. Blank faces stared at me, drugged up to their eyeballs. I saw my room, a dingy little bed far too small for my stature which would be my home for a while. “Is this the frontier of psychiatry?” I thought. I cried myself to sleep that night.

Things have changed in the last decade of mental health ‘care.’ For the most part the new wards look like hotels but they still have the drugged up patients. Very calm, very mellow individuals that won’t let out a peep. I’ve been committed seven times over the duration of my illness. Seven times I’ve been incarcerated because my family thought I was smoking too much cannabis or playing too many video games. It wasn’t that I had a disease, it was my behaviour. No one could care less about the ‘disease’ I was suffering, a ‘disease of the soul.’ You can’t treat that with drugs, you treat it with real, human contact and connection. Alas, the drugs didn’t have much effect on me. I was neither calm nor mellow. They considered me manic because of such. Really I had the ‘legitimate disease’ that was affecting my brain, I had autism as defined by Eugen Bleuler in 1908: “a loss of awareness of external events and a preoccupation with the self and one’s own thoughts,” which would be part of his criteria for schizophrenia. My crime? Thinking too much. Becoming ‘delusional’ as I saw through the veil, past their lies.

I will resent yet I understand why they categorised me as a problem. I was socioeconomically deprived, I was a high school dropout, and I was a drug abuser. Yet I was smart, perhaps too smart. I used to laugh inappropriately as they explained to me my condition. I used to cry in public when I saw the masses leading their meaningless existences. I loved to fantasise about great things. I saw the connections between everything which was deemed “loose associations.” Considered extremely ill they would whack a community treatment order on me, basically a good behaviour bond, and they considered my crime schizophrenia in this weird mix of medico-legal jargon. I’ve never committed a crime in my life yet I’ve gone in front of magistrates to determine my freedom. Fortunately they can only keep you for three months before they tag and release you back into the wild as an outpatient. Not without a mental health team being your parole board though. Fortnightly to monthly injections making sure you get the ‘treatment’ you deserve.

I was re-established as a functioning member of society eventually. When I started to work on my education and the prescribed drugs had their effect. When all my fanciful ideas went out the window. But they took a part of me that I’ll never get back, my memory. I’ll never remember how I was diagnosed, except for perhaps a brain scan being in the equation. I’ll never remember those fateful days spent in my room over a four year period because it all became a blur as prescribed and illicit drugs interacted. I’ll never remember my formative years as a young adult because that’s exactly what they wanted to take away from me. They wanted to retrain my mind, I was scared of them, deathly afraid. I knew what they were taking away from me but I had no say in the matter. I was deemed unfit. My sense of self died back then, it was an ego death and I had to start from square one. Building up a sense of self and social skills again. I had been imprisoned for four years of my life after committing no crimes but thinking too much. That is my story.

Is this the best we’ve got? To chemically restrain the most vulnerable. “Sensitive little petals,” I call them and myself. They couldn’t hack it in society so their crime is mental illness. However, it’s far too easy to relate ‘frontier psychiatry’ with a medico-legal system that warps and twists the very essence of what it means to be human. Taking away free will and liberties because we’re “a threat to others or ourselves.” I stand by the fact that I’ve never had a criminal record, outside of mental health issues, and I’ve never entertained the idea of suicide. Despite the atrocities committed against me when I was a young adult I’ve always been a fighter. I will always push on with a glimmer of hope. Even these days, a decade later, as the drugs do more harm than good because I’ve been on them so long, I try to think outside the box. I write my story for awareness, just some public awareness of what’s going on behind closed doors.

Sometimes I get absolutely livid that they placed me in an adult psychiatric ward at the age of seventeen. Labeled depressed at that stage they cornered me off and delivered a handsome dose of antipsychotics to make me ‘calm’ like the rest. Real zombies, my nightmares had become a reality. At the age of eighteen my memory fails me but I remember the brain scan, I remember the discharge paper, I remember that fateful diagnosis of schizophrenia. I don’t know how or why I earnt it, perhaps the drugs had their intended effect. Go in, forget everything, come out a lot calmer. Still I would try and ‘tap into the other side’ by taking abundant amounts of psychotropic substances. I wouldn’t let them win, not like this. Still, it was kind of nice being a member of society again. I got to go to university, I got to make friends again, I got to be part of a community. There’s nothing more shameful though than being considered an outcast because you ‘think too much.’ That was my only crime.

So life goes on, I don’t have many memories over the last decade from what I can only presume is the drug’s effect. It’s traumatising however when my memory does come back in fits and starts. One day I’ll remember that second hospital admission, one day I’ll get answers. My memory is supremely nonlinear. The only constant about my experience is being an extreme hermit. I don’t blame my family for letting me have my way, I wanted it. I wanted to go on crazy journeys through my own mind and see if I could make it break. Consuming all sorts of mass media, namely Wikipedia, in which I would develop my most pronounced symptom, ‘Wikipedia word soup.’ I would go on rants about various different articles that I thought were related but no one else could see the connections. “What a glorious time to be alive,” I thought to myself, “I have the world’s knowledge at my fingertips and now I can find answers!” My answers were unsatisfactory to my family and friends. One side of the family appreciated my journey, one side of the family considered me a madman, who was right at the end of the day?

Some consider me a genius, a sort of broken genius. Never living up to my full potential because of my schizophrenia, substance abuse disorder, and type 1 diabetes. I scoff at the remark, I just consider myself well-read. Well-versed in aspects of the mind. I understand, I empathise. Perhaps that’s another one of my crimes, hyperempathy. Though I’ve become jaded and cynical as of late and I distance myself from others. After you’ve been burnt for the umpteenth time you tend to shy away from the fire. Alas, being burnt never stopped me and I think I’m beginning to come back out of my shell. They said I was manic, I say I’m just overly passionate. This is my personality, this is *me*.

I’ve met a lot of other prisoners in my life. There’s a stark inclination towards suicide though which I’ve never understood. Why give up? Then they win. I’ll never let them win, I’ll push on despite adversity. They’re trying to formulate what it means to be ‘neurotypical,’ I consider that unethical and a crime on all the fanciful ideas out there that could make the world a better place. Schizophrenia is sometimes considered a disease of language. Schizophrenics use a vast array of metaphors out of context to communicate their ideas. Some like myself get it, others seem to consider them ‘raving lunatics.’ If you actually sit down with these people it’s a wild ride sure but it’s actually an interesting ride at that. They’re real people too, something the frontiers of psychiatry seem to forget at the end of the day. The system is bursting at the seams as a result of its own poor misconduct. Everyone’s depressed in some way! “Pop them a pill, there’s just too many!” With the chemical shotgun shells at the ready, they aim, they fire.

Though I can’t blame these frontier psychiatrists. Society as a whole has demanded that this ‘problem’ be fixed. Society just doesn’t know how sick it is. That we’re getting more distant from my perspective like the universe expanding and the galaxies getting more distant from each other. We all seem to be getting lost in a world of our own design, forgetting each other exist. After my acute phase of schizophrenia I tried to reach out to others but my cries for help all fell on deaf ears. My family is particularly involved in confrontation and emotional distancing. We can’t handle all of what makes us who we are because we seem to lack the communication skills required of proper human beings. I’m making a stand against that, right here, right now. I love my family and friends to death and beyond. I would never allow them to be hurt by ‘society’ as much as I have been.

But what is society apart from a system in equilibrium. So many different perspectives, so many different views on how the world should play out. Some are for and some are against mental health being an issue. You can probably guess my stance. Albeit, it won’t be too long before mental health issues fade into non existence. People *will* become more understanding of each other. We’re still in the dark ages of mental illness where it’s considered a disease of the brain. “A chemical imbalance,” some like to posit. Though it feels like we're in the 1800s again when all illness was “an imbalance of the four humours of the body; blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm.” Replace that with serotonin, dopamine, etc. This simplification of theory taken as explanations is doing more harm than good. Medical students of all people take these simplifications as law for absurdly complex systems. This law is propagated in the public sphere and used as fuel for the 'war for drugs.’

Where’s the mandated psychosocial treatment? Not once, except in hospital roughly a decade after my first admission, was there a psychologist on the team. And as an outpatient unless you have a lot of money or can live off ten sessions a year using a “mental health care plan” from your general practitioner do you see a psychologist. If you’re extremely lucky you get linked in with a psychosocial support service who focus on recovery, employment, and housing. Only practical needs though, they’re ill-equipped to offer psychotherapy and more advanced services. Which leads to a conundrum. How can we go against research and expect these mentally ill individuals to get better without proper psychosocial treatment. It’s a system bursting at the seams by its own design. Mild to moderate cases cause the mental health system to give way while moderate to extreme cases get ‘half-assed’ treatment.

I’ve heard stories I tell you of real psychiatrists. Supposedly they do talk therapy as well. The best I’ve gotten out of a public psychiatrist, although it’s nice we have them at least, is to “suck it up.” But real psychiatrists already have immense amounts of patients and that’s for those that can actually afford them. For the socioeconomically deprived it’s a far cry, a dream, to have someone administer your drugs and actually listen to you. If only such holistic treatment was available to all. Anyways, that’s just not reality, sophisticated services require a lot of money behind them. People who have studied until they’re in extreme amounts of debt and paying off their student loans is a top priority. Sometimes such services come about for the general population but most are executed in a poor fashion. They get filled up very quickly with a vast array of cases and eventually the service has to yell “STOP!” and put the brakes on. It’s extremely hard to get into the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) in Australia for mental health issues anymore for example; let alone the Disability Support Pension (DSP). Pages and pages of documentation is required from disparate services trying to link them all up to create a plan for recovery. Hilariously there’s services out there just for signing up to these services! But the NDIS can be a beautiful thing. Cleaning, transport, a case manager, most of your practical needs met. It’s like the disparate services I’ve got but in one package. Working together towards recovery.

People have grand ideas about the recovery process. That it inspires reassurance and morale in the individual, but most importantly hope. Unfortunately, or maybe fortunately, most of the recovery process falls on the ill individual in question. It’s in their hands to take life by the reigns and live it. It’s an age old proverb that “you can’t help someone that doesn’t want to help themselves.” Which is interesting because involuntary commitment into psychiatric wards certainly is a far cry from this age old proverb. You get neglect on the outside and your liberties taken away from you on the inside. There’s no winning. You’re eventually doomed to be shafted by a variety of services if you don’t recover quick enough. The very people who are supposed to understand mental illness, with lived experience, thinking recovery is all too easy because ‘they’ve done it.’ Well mister, just because *you’ve done it* doesn’t mean it’s as easy as it sounds. Alas I don’t think they’ll ever be any good answers to this misconception about the recovery process.

The frontiers of psychiatry seem to be all too lacking. “Pop some pills, take an injection, and be on your way good sir” is not good enough. This isn’t even going into the ethics of incarcerating people for supposed inappropriate mannerisms. Us schizophrenics like to talk in metaphors, we like to reach for the stars, we like to relate everything to everything else. They’ve taken that away from me, I almost feel like a robot. My seventeen year old self seems like a distant past when I still had some life left in me. Laying on that dingy, little bed. Crying myself to sleep.

