---
title: A Letter to the Registrar
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [psychiatry, medication, essay]
---

Today I met my new Registrar. A handsome young man, clean-shaven with a nice haircut and smile. He looked acceptable and inviting to approach. I thought today was the day that I'd get a bit of understanding, some new hope, a fresh start. Forty-five minutes I spent explaining my story. Forty-five minutes of turbulent emotions bringing up the past. I tried to explain that I was adamant it wasn't a mood disorder but when the Registrar heard the words 'cycle’ and 'episode’ I could see I was already starting to lose him.

People have a lot of preconceptions, everything should fit nicely into a box. Supposedly cycling negative symptoms are rare and knowing registrars they don't take any chances. Six months in then out is the name of the game. Try and get through without admissions or a suicide and you're well on your way to success. So I accepted that my treatment plan wouldn't change but please, just a bit of understanding of my position would have been nice. I have nothing to gain from downgrading my diagnosis from schizoaffective disorder to residual schizophrenia. I just think residual schizophrenia is the correct diagnosis. This affective component to my illness has followed me around like baggage for most of my life. I wanted to put a stop to it, now.

Affective disorders strike at the very heart of the self. Your happiest moments are manic episodes. Your saddest moments are depressed episodes. Supposedly you're not your illness so is this really you? I'm a passionate sort of guy. “This is me!” I roar to the world when I'm not experiencing negative symptoms. Yet people call me hypomanic for being me. Is this a joke? Stop analysing people and behaviour pathologically. Stop saying I need structure and the like. I thrive when I don't have structure, when I can take things at my own pace. It's why I want to be a writer, it agrees with me in a wholesome fashion. Yet there's these people that want to medicate behaviour but not the disease. Not only that they have their preconceptions based on labels and hastily written notes that dictate a person's existence.

For once I wish the therapist considered my word as the law, or even just the primary source of information, when it comes to my case, my needs, and my wants. I've done my research, I've written down my thoughts, and I’m convinced I know the situation at hand. Perhaps they don't expect such raw intelligence and emotion out of their patients. Convinced that they know best. They're treating by the lowest common denominator here. You're almost considered subhuman for being under their care. I don't get a say about my diagnosis, I don't get a say about my medication, and I sure as hell don't get a say in what it means to live a life worth living.

“Get a job!” The Registrar spouts in a nicer tone of language and voice. But I do have a job, I'm starting my own business, and I see it going places. Sure it's not conventional but it's mine. I crumble under structure as previously mentioned and it's this disconnect between my wants and theirs that's creating all the frustration and friction. They have a preconception of what recovery looks like to them and it involves integrating with the masses. Unfortunately I don't consider that a life worth living. I have zero motivation to be 'normal.’ I've been broken, beaten, and traumatised by my experiences and this is the most I can manage. Little notes on my thoughts, little notes on how I view the world. Perhaps one day the registrar will get more power and less liability. They’re the first line of defence against the encroaching mentally ill horde. Meanwhile the consultants sit in their ivory towers. What an absurd world we live in.

If only this was pathological. That these behaviours were actually the disease. No, they’re symptoms. There’s not enough focus on the causes, only the effects. So where does that leave us? Well basically we’re stuck with a public system in which you build rapport with a certain individual, most likely your registrar, and then they disappear and you have to start the entire process again. People look at your case notes, they get preconceptions, they then hear your side of the story and here’s the problem: they’ve already made their first impression before they’ve even met you. What guts me is that to diagnose a mood disorder you need some very strong indication from the patient that is what they’re suffering from. In my own case I get fits and starts of supposed depressed and manic mood. Nothing prolonged, nothing that would make it the core symptom of my illness. Rather I’m either getting emotional dysregulation or I’m temperamental. I think the Registrar got a sense of that when my mood absolutely plummeted when I knew he wasn’t getting me. I’m of the opinion that I’m temperamental, or ‘moody’ in layman’s terms. This isn’t a disorder, it’s what it means to be human.

In and out the registrars go, getting a snapshot of your condition each month if you’re lucky. For an hour or less each month, if that, your destiny is determined. I have absolutely no say in the matter of whether I get my monthly injection of aripiprazole or not. If I say no they put me on a community treatment order and by law I’m then required to have the injection. If I say yes their game continues and you sink further into the system. I swear the Registrar was joking today when he said they’d think of adjusting my lithium. I’m not retarded, I know lithium has a very small window of therapeutic benefit. It’s like a switch, it’s either on or off. You can’t just adjust it like an antipsychotic.

I honestly don't think they take my case seriously. Afflicted by zero to poor amounts of motivation, an impairment of my reward system striking when I don’t want it to, and asociality being very disrupting to my connections with my friends and family. This can all be summed up by avolition and it’s incredibly debilitating. That with the other symptoms such as monosyllabic responses, slow motor movement, and latency in responses add up to a bad time. But no one can or will help me. It’s taboo to speak of these things because drugs are ineffective. If I’m not experiencing psychotic episodes, severely depressed, or severely manic then they want nothing to do with me because they can’t just pop a pill. I’m sick of it, the dancing I have to do to try and get any help, and when it does arrive it feels lacking.

So here’s the problem: registrars go in and out of fashion, the patient is bouncing from one person to the next, there’s no single person who acts as an anchor in the person’s recovery, and finally they’re treated like subhumans the entire process. Delinquents that have never read a book in their life. I’ve read, and read, and I feel I have a solid idea of what’s going on. I’m the expert of myself. I know what I need, yet their solution is to do the exact opposite of what I need. To become another cog in a wheel of the grand machine. What a meaningless existence. It’s as if there’s no help with recovery. Everything you need to take into your own hands while under the effect of mentally disabling drugs. Fun times! If life wasn’t a constant struggle enough with the disease then these people trying to ‘help’ get in the way.

There’s no scan or test that one can use to suss out what the disease actually is. It’s all based on hearsay and subjective evidence. My own destiny is based on the interpretation of a range of individuals that call themselves physicians. I consider my brilliant general practitioner a physician, psychiatrists not so much. He focuses on causes rather than effects, he focuses on the individual past what are deemed good or bad behaviours. It’s a holistic treatment plan that takes everything into account and I value his opinion highly. He’s given me the time and day above all else, something the public system just can’t offer, and really got to know me. For free! I’m not kidding. He gave me reassurance, built up my morale, explained what he thought was the case, the direction I should take, and gave me hope for free. You can’t make this up. However, in comes the psychiatrist that gets a snapshot of your mood and illness in general, makes sweeping statements that have wide ramifications on your life, and personally everything they say comes with a lot of stigma.

Mania for example comes with a lot of stigma. You hear stories of the sexually promiscuous, the shopping sprees, and the substance abuse. A diagnosis of bipolar disorder comes with all these things and more. The crushing lows filled with guilt, hopelessness, worthlessness, and suicidal ideations. I’ve rarely to ever entertained these ideas and this is what they were trying to pin on me. The substance abuse is another thing entirely. Supposedly I’m trying to control my mood using alcohol. Why on earth would I use a depressant to help me with depression? Do they honestly think I’ve lost the plot that much. Sweeping statements, labels, stigma, and you know why, because they don’t listen. They pick and choose the keywords out of the patient’s language. They use past history, which as previously mentioned are hastily written notes without a lot of credibility. And to top it all off it’s all based on interpretation rather than facts and evidence. If only I was rich, could afford a weekly psychiatrist, and could start getting the treatment I deserve. Yet it’s a system all too lacking.

I realise the system is bursting at the seams. But it’s by its own design. Mild to moderate cases fill the system while moderate to extreme cases that have been unemployed for years because of their disability get the same treatment. In and out, an hour or less a month if you’re lucky. Honestly this is a cry for help in a system controlling my destiny with their mentally disabling drugs. I’m part of the system now, I nearly always have been. I know it inside and out and honestly I see no escape. If I’m not going well they keep my medication the same. If I continue to not go well on the medication they increase the medication. If I continue to take the medication and I’m not doing well I’m non-compliant. If I’m supposed non-compliant I end up in hospital. Then they break my soul and my trust in the system, I’m made an outpatient, and the cycle continues. I’m expected to fit into the mould that is society and if I don’t I’m considered on bad behaviour and my position in the system is cemented.

Trying to fit a square peg in a circle hole is never a good idea. The person in question trying to fit into the system instead of the system accommodating them will resist, they’ll struggle, and honestly it takes the remaining parts of their humanity from them. It sucks away their individuality and honestly if there was a depression that I’m familiar with it involves existential crises and angst. Fleeting moments of despair that I never quite entertain to the point that I used to. Negative symptoms of schizophrenia though is my core symptom at the moment. The avolition is devastating with its amotivation causing an inability to engage in goal-directed behaviour, anhedonia impairing my reward system, and asociality causing a constant disconnect, particularly between myself, friends, family, and the world at large. Diminished expression is also problematic with the blunted affect making it hard to convey my rich range of emotions, that somehow I convey through writing, and the alogia causing monosyllabic responses with a latency. That’s what I was trying to convey today. That these were my problems and I wanted answers. Not only that, I wanted some understanding.

