---
title: Beyond Belief
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [schizophrenia, story]
---

Schizophrenia is not the goto diagnosis under any circumstances. Psychiatrists almost feel like they’re giving their patients a death sentence when invoking the schizophrenia card. However, the ills of misdiagnosis promote a lot of suffering. An elegant weapon that I now have in my arsenal that I didn’t have ten years ago is a lot of lived experience and a lot of research and studies behind my back. To this day I’m adamant that I’ve explored schizophrenia in mosts of its darkest corners and in doing so I would like to impart on my reader the important points of what makes schizophrenia tick.

The typical timeline for schizophrenia is a prodromal phase (think initial symptoms but no full-blown psychosis), an acute phase (where psychosis is prevalent), and a residual phase (which is similar to the prodromal phase with perhaps mild psychotic symptoms). Let’s begin with a typical example of someone going through prodromal phase symptoms.

A rising sports star, an excellent academic, a social butterfly but where did everything go wrong? Their parents are confused when they drop out of sport entirely, their grades are failing, and they start spending all of their time in their room. “Perhaps it’s just a developmental stage” they think. Honestly, these are the first warning signs of schizophrenia and will be the mainstays of the illness throughout all the phases. All of this happened to me for example. Without much choice in the matter I ended up placing myself behind a computer and isolating myself. It was hard to get out of bed, it was hard to concentrate at school, everything was just so damn hard not because I was sad, grieving, or feeling worthless, but I had next to no motivation or willpower to continue on in life. I’ve asked friends and family what happened back then because my memory is vague at best but they just said I slowly faded away out of memory and out of mind.

Depression is a classic diagnosis for those suffering the prodromal phase of schizophrenia. For all intents and purposes the negative symptoms of schizophrenia (athymia, alogia, avolition-apathy, and asociality-anhedonia) look like depression but aren’t depression. You can throw as many antidepressants you want at the individual but it won’t make them any better. That was basically what happened to me. They thought I had a depression but as I said I lacked the emotional content. There was no sadness, grief, worry, or worthlessness. There wasn’t even suicidal ideations. I just didn’t exist or was connected to reality in any significant sense. Which is another theme of what we’ll talk about, this constant disconnect from reality that a schizophrenic experiences.

I visited my school councillor almost daily. Every other day he would find me crying outside his office because I couldn’t handle the sounds and stimulation that a busy school had. I mostly went there for the company because as mentioned I didn’t feel connected to the world in any substantial manner. School councillors unfortunately aren’t prepared for the nature of schizophrenia, mostly dealing with depressed students stressed out with studying. It was no wonder that he eventually just told me to quit school. I was a problem case. No matter the therapy I just wasn’t getting any better and being at a school for the gifted I would have brought down their average grade. This would be the trend for I don’t know how many years. Off the top of my head it was between the ages of fourteen and eighteen that I would be labeled a hopelessly depressed individual and I suffered for all those years. It wasn’t until my friends introduced me to cannabis that I would get any relief from my symptoms. Perhaps too much relief.

Thus began my comorbid substance abuse disorder. I would spend my entire pension on cannabis just so I could relieve some of my negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Unfortunately it wasn’t a good coping strategy because as many of you might know if you’re predisposed to schizophrenia then cannabis is a fantastic way to bring on a full-blown psychotic episode and the acute phase of schizophrenia. And it did. I had wildly delusional thinking and hallucinations. I had discovered fundamental facts about the world such as the mathematical formula for the universe, the static and dynamic dichotomy, sleep was akin to death, women were omniscient, I saw time and space amounted to a cube suspended in a flux while faces flew past, and zombies bashed at my windows at night.

The zombies were particularly interesting because they were both a fear and fascination of mine. At the age of six I was subjected to the opening scene of the video game Resident Evil. I would hide under my bed every night because ‘the zombies were coming.’ My room was between the entrance and living room of the house so people constantly walked past and I was left terrified they would eat me.

I remember during one of my psychotic episodes about zombies that my father held me tightly in bed one night. I had come to his door because I had just seen and heard arms bashing against my window. Something inside said it wasn’t real but alas I had to call for help. In bed I struggled to be let go. I just wanted to hide, or escape, or something. I knew they had surrounded the house so my best bet was to wait till they just left. I heard the smashing of glass, the moans, I was terrified. It’s only recently I remember these harrowing times because trauma tends to breed amnesia.

It reminds me of a time when I was actually having a dream and there was a zombie apocalypse again. We fled to Antarctica and in the snow fields I had a full blown psychotic episode where I saw a zombie on the horizon and it turned and looked at me. Then vanished, as if nothing was there. Again, it’s hard to tell what’s a dream and what’s reality when you’re going through a psychotic episode. Even my dreams were infected by the disorder. I’ve had many dreams of the zombie apocalypse and a psychotic episode makes all those dreams a reality. An honestly horrifying reality.

The cube though, that was a mind altering. I got the impression that time flowed in both directions. That my father’s existence was as much based on mine as my own existence was based on his. I was the progenitor of my father as much as he was the progenitor of myself. I had a fascination with my father for many years and I can only conclude this delusion, that my own existence propagated his own, was a result of my admiration for him. He was the rock, the stable carer in my life, everything I wanted to be and more. If only I could validate this relationship then I might feel a whole lot better. I looked up to him because he sustained me when I was nothing but a husk of a human being. He would cook and bring me meals above all else. Which for someone who isn’t suicidal, just deeply disturbed and isolated, meant the world to me.

There’s a common trend here in that my delusions and hallucinations were wholly based on how I perceived the world. As we’ll see ‘philosophical zombies’ comes into the equation as well. This was most likely based on the constant disconnect I had from reality. I didn’t feel loved, I didn’t feel capable of loving. For all intents and purposes other people were just sacks of meat to me and that in itself is grim. It really strikes home that you’re alone in the world. Lonelier and more isolated than anyone can possibly imagine.

The static and dynamic dichotomy is a little harder to explain. Basically because the world was as it has been eternally I was the only one that could move through space and time. I saw people come and go and I had no connection to them because they were automatons, merely reacting to my every move. Basically I was convinced that I had created all of reality and that I was a lonely god at the center of it all. I believed there might be other gods out there, maybe even that everyone had their own world they lived in, and we could only send messages to each other. Never truly being able to connect, never truly seeing anything past the image we get of someone else’s world. Isolation is its own kind of hell.

However women, women were interesting because they were a type of oracle. They knew what I was going to do before I even did it. I couldn’t handle the presence of women except for my sister who was so kind and nurturing towards me and used her special powers for good. She’d guide me in my struggles and make sure I felt safe. I couldn’t trust other women like my mother at the time though because they were convinced I needed the chemical lobotomies. To have my wild imagination taken away so that I became a zombie like them. A hollow man.

My early delusions revolved around the idea that I thought I knew for a fact that the zombie apocalypse was upon us in some capacity. At some times I would literally be in the middle of it with arms bashing on my windows at night, at others it was an insidious philosophical zombie scenario. Basically I was trapped in hell and there was no way out. “Hell is other people” as we all know and I wasn’t coping with social interaction at all. Trapped by persecutory and grandiose delusions with the occasional hallucination I was not in a good state.

Later on the religious delusions started to take hold. There was the fact that there was an immortal upper class who propagated the notion of death through sacrificing the lower class. I didn’t know who was who, who I could trust. They provided the ability to ascend to those they considered ‘worthy.’ Religion was a means to keep the common man from seeing the truth. “Yes, you’ll find immortality after death,” they said, laughing behind our backs when the truth was clear that death was the end and immortality was to be found in this life. Everything was a means of control and I couldn’t leave my room in fear of falling into that trap. I had to empower the common man by showing them the truth so we could all live together in eternal bliss.

What’s particularly fascinating about these religious delusions is my family was never religious and I’ve never been religious, yet they held very true to me. I wouldn’t leave my room except under extreme circumstances for four years. Four years of isolation. It starts to play on the mind after a little bit.

So to be considered ‘worthy’ my only hope was to study alone and figure out the truth. So I studied, and studied hard. Reading between the lines, making loose associations, and only when I found the answers I was looking for years later at the age of nineteen did I come out of my room and begun preaching the good word using my secular religion. It effectively came out as what I affectionately call ‘Wikipedia word soup.’ People weren’t happy about this. I was terrified as there was no way to beat this immortal upper class. They would try and shut me up with chemical lobotomies, which at the time was a healthy dose of antipsychotics and mood stabilizers because of the schizoaffective disorder diagnosis I had picked up in previous years.

I tried to regress back to my room but they’d found out about my plotting to overthrow the upper class and sent me to hospital for what was now the third visit. Somehow it was the second visit that pinned me with schizoaffective disorder and a community treatment order. The first was being labelled depressed. What’s fascinating about the schizoaffective disorder diagnosis is that at the time they didn’t know I was suffering from type 1 diabetes. A simple blood glucose check could have been part of my full physical but to no avail.

They took my drugs away from me, they took my beloved research away from me, they took my liberties away from me. I spent three months in hospital, the maximum stay in Australia, and in the interim I got angry. It was supposed to be a weekend stay they said, anything to get me through the door and into the acute unit. I lost my shit. I began to bash my head against the wall until it was bleeding, I nearly knocked myself unconscious, but before that a solid dose of haloperidol and midazolam knocked me out for good. I woke up the next morning a little cheery and the nurse looked at me and went “you don’t remember anything do you?” Supposedly I had gone into shock with my blood pressure reaching near fatal levels. So if I wasn’t doing a good job killing myself softly on the outside they were doing a fantastic job nearly killing me on the inside.

I made some friends but they were being weirded out by my elaborate theories of space and time. I mostly wandered the corridors alone muttering things to myself and pacing around. By the third month though I somewhat came to. It was as if a fog was lifted from me. No longer was I wildly psychotic, no longer was I in a dream state of being neither awake or asleep, no longer did I have any substance behind my elaborate theories. Still, something made me hold onto those theories and they’ve governed my behaviour to this very day. I still study a lot trying to find the ‘truth,’ I still hole up in my room most of the time because I was so isolated for so very long and company is exhausting, and I still think there’s a natural, but probably not intentional, control system for the masses in place; just without such a bizarre twist.

Fortunately I was rid of a crippling cannabis addiction in those three months. I’ve done ‘research’ since to see if it’s right for me but the research points to the negative. Unfortunately I moved to alcohol and that’s been my nemesis ever since. Alcohol and cigarettes, basically my life for a number of years. Somehow, and this is probably the most extraordinary aspect of my story, I managed to get a university degree after my solid three month stay in hospital. I got a Bachelor of Computer Science and Technology at the University of Sydney. I developed a love for computer science during my studies of the universe from the seat behind my computer and it’s partially how I explained the world away. To this day I still have a ‘Social Application Programming Interface (API)’ in which my Social API was carefully constructed over a number of years while I was at university. Now I can appear completely normal if I’m not going through severe negative symptoms of schizophrenia, i.e. a relapse.

So I exited university and decided to join the workforce. However, the pressures of everyday life and trying to find ‘my one true love’ put too much stress on the system. I came back to the mental health unit and was promptly put on an injection of aripiprazole and a decent dose of amisulpride and lithium after my fourth hospital visit. I wasn’t doing too well in the negative symptoms of schizophrenia department. On two separate occasions, without the doctor remembering me, I was given a diagnosis of negative symptoms of schizophrenia yet I was supposedly ‘high-functioning.’ Well I didn’t feel high-functioning. I had lost my job, I had lost my friends, I was nothing to my family, I was a wreck. I felt completely disconnected from my friends, family, and the world at large. It’s this disconnect from reality that fueled the avolition-apathy (abulia), athymia, asociality-anhedonia, and alogia.

I would continue to search for love and I was desperate. That’s another story entirely but after having expectations not met, I regressed into my shell. After the seventh hospital visit they promptly attached a substance abuse disorder label onto my case along with schizophrenia and called it a day. Sure two to three litres of wine a night is probably not healthy, but seriously, another label? This is when I got frustrated, this is when I decided to learn more about my condition. This is when I gained a lot of insight.

Everything fit into place, the prodromal phase, the acute phase, and what I was now experiencing, the residual phase were all examples of someone progressing through one of the schizophrenias; whatever schizophrenia that may be. I was still labeled schizoaffective by my main mental health team because they absolutely abhor changing treatment plans. I’m of the opinion that my sleep, diet, hygiene, and mood were all negatively impacted by the schizophrenia.

In and out of employment, living off savings, delving into the virtual world time and time again. All of that amounted to a lot of suffering. I was fortunately considered and put into a program called Community Living Support who allowed me to go on walks and have a chit chat with mental health professionals. They came to the person in question rather than expecting the impossible which is regular appointments at a designated location. However, over time they kept pushing. They knew I was witty and intelligent. They knew I was high-functioning and they wanted me to be a success story. Unfortunately I wouldn’t budge. They come to me these days and ask what’s something constructive I could do for my recovery. I just want to tell them I need a friend. Outside their jurisdiction would be my guess.

I met my lovely general practitioner about three years ago who is genuinely my friend. He’s been a huge boon to my recovery and makes recovery seem possible. He just ‘gets it,’ though that doesn’t help much with negative symptoms of schizophrenia because there aren’t many treatment plans out there, or research for that manner, relating to residual schizophrenia and jumping back on the horse again. Nonetheless he’s a gentle soul that’s just as crazy as I am, which is comforting.

In writing this I feel like there is hope for recovery. It’s a slow process and when you feel well you just want to jump back into the fray and start living your life again. But it’s a slow, ever so slow process that requires a lot of thought and effort on the part of the schizophrenic. In sharing my story I hope some have seen the horrors, and some have seen the hope, for the schizophrenic. I’ve been told I’m a good writer, brilliant even, but honestly I’m just speaking my mind. I’ve gone through some harrowing experiences and I feel like, sometimes at least, that they’ve made me a little stronger. So to all you schizophrenics out there: you’ll be weighed, measured, and found wanting. It’s up to you to put on that brave face everyday and rely on whomever you can to get through this debilitating disease.

