---
title: I'm not mad, just misunderstood
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [mental illness, love, essay]
---

Feeling misunderstood happens to everyone. It’s just a matter of fact that some of your most fanciful ideas can leave the room staring back at you blankly. This happens a lot when I talk about my delusions, which for all intents and purposes hold some truth to them which is perhaps the scary part. It’s embarrassing, frustrating, even maddening that these beliefs, that held so true to you for a time, and perhaps still have a sway in your opinions or behaviours, just get people thinking “how could you ever believe that?” Though on the flip side there’s people who think “bollocks, you never believed that!” Equally maddening as they don’t appreciate the web of lies the mind can spin to survive terrifying situations.

However, I think the biggest misunderstanding we have is of ourselves. For example for the longest time I thought “I’m not traumatised, I had a good childhood, I just had a bad experience when I was a young adult.” Unfortunately I misunderstood the situation entirely. One example that rings true for me now is my fear and fascination of zombies. I had been traumatised at the age of six watching older people play Resident Evil 1 and 2. I thought this was a joke, that no child actually really believes there’s an impending zombie apocalypse, but funnily enough I did. This deep seated fear was prevalent throughout my dreams, I became a zombie when I became a full-time stoner, and it was a living nightmare when I was delusional about and hallucinated about the zombie apocalypse.

What’s really frustrating though is explaining a mental disorder to those that consider themselves relatively mentally healthy. Trying to explain depression, mania, delusions, hallucinations, compulsions, anxiety, whatever, is an exercise in frustration because even if they’ve experienced deflated or elevated mood before for example they’re not you right now. I’ve had a lot of peer support workers with lived experience with mental health issues say the most obtuse things to someone currently suffering their exact condition because it all seems so easy on the other side. This is one thing I’m taking forward when I talk about recovery from now on, that it ‘all seems so easy once you’ve recovered.’

Being misunderstood isn’t just frustrating, it’s isolating. One of my hopes of writing about my own experiences, most importantly while my symptoms aren’t so severe I can’t write but severe enough that they’re definitely apparent, is to give a little hope to others who might read it and think: “Hey, there are other people out there.” Isolation is kryptonite to the schizophrenic, the symptoms feed off of it, and if I can relieve the symptoms of another schizophrenic even for a moment it was all worth it.

Anyways, I’ve had my darkest times while feeling isolated. Periods of complete disconnection from reality. Ego death because you realise you’ll probably rot away here and your sense of self starts to deteriorate. That’s when it gets really crazy: when you don’t fear death, life is just a ride, you’re literally the imagination of yourself. Everything starts to break down and when others finally find you in this mess of misunderstandings, they don’t understand yet but they know you need help.

It takes a long time to develop an understanding between two people. Like my father and I. I don’t think he’ll ever understand my illness and on the contrary I don’t think I’ll ever understand why he still cares. What we do understand is the distance we need to provide each other to live together which is basically minimal talk unless it’s about making money or ‘good things.’ People see my loving, caring father and think I’m in the best possible place I could be. What he yearns for though is that I strike up independence, make it on my own because he won’t be around forever. Unfortunately I don’t have a license, I don’t have a job, I don’t really have anything at the moment but the new connections I fostered recently and my writings which are part of my recovery process.

A lot of people misunderstand those going through the recovery process. They feel helpless because this person for the most part isn’t willing to help themselves. What can others do to help those that won’t even help themselves? It’s really love and support that any mentally ill person needs to bootstrap them into the recovery process, not a list of tasks they need to complete themselves to ‘get better.’ It’s like when I’m having a bad day and I know I’m going under into negative symptoms of schizophrenia. I’ll desperately call around because I can sense the disconnection coming on, I need someone, anyone to give me the time of day so I don’t relapse. There usually is someone but they’re like “What can I do to help? I feel so helpless!” and I’ll respond “Just keep talking, tell me about your day…” and that’s soothing, it’s food for the soul. To feel a sense of order in the chaos is all it takes to relieve some of the symptoms. Maybe, just maybe, people understand that.

A mentally ill person has people misunderstanding them, they’re misunderstanding themselves, but most importantly the person in question is misunderstanding other people. I had a discussion today which basically highlighted that when we think people are judging us we’re actually judging them. Which is ironic isn’t it? The judged becomes the judge. I think above all else this fosters the sense of disconnection and isolation as paranoia in the extreme case sets in. We misinterpret people’s actions and behaviours towards us and this breeds a lot of different symptom profiles in various different mental health issues. The socially anxious breeds anxiety, the depressed individual breeds feelings of guilt and worthlessness, and the schizophrenic breeds paranoia for example. All because maybe someone looked at them then quickly looked away. Something as simple as that. It just doesn’t occur to them that perhaps the person let their gaze wander and accidentally locked eyes with your own.

Misunderstanding after misunderstanding, where does it all end? It doesn’t really until a sense of connection and trust is established between the mentally ill individual and someone they consider worthy of that trust. For myself it’s between my doctor and I. I travelled four hours in total today to visit my doctor for my weekly check-up after moving a decent distance away from his practice. And you know what? It was worth it! It centered me, it got me thinking correctly again, it was therapeutic and he isn’t even qualified to give talk therapy, I think. It’s all about trust and a sense of understanding at the end of the day. Things I value dearly after being deprived of them for so long.

So mentally ill individuals get relief from their symptoms when they feel like they can trust someone and have a sense of connection. The next step is to have them feel part of a community. Even if that community is just something small like a life drawing class there’s nothing more therapeutic than a shared activity and feeling human again. But mental illness propagates a whole lot of stigma and misunderstandings. We’re not raving lunatics. You’d far more likely find us holed up in our rooms waiting for our demons to stop tormenting us than out in public causing a nuisance. The ‘raving lunatics’ are the exception, not the rule, yet even then they probably need what I’ve been talking about, a sense of connection and community, more than anyone else. They’re alone, frustrated, out of place, and out of their mind. I can only imagine they got that way because they felt misunderstood and it felt like the world betrayed them. I know I feel like acting out when I get into that position.

Still, there’s something to be said about people who are mentally ill and part of their symptom profile, which I’ll subscribe to, is that no matter what they don’t feel the love and can’t reciprocate that love. People distance themselves from you, they think you ‘need time,’ but honestly what that person needs is a god damn hug! I’ve gotten hugs recently and it made me feel a lot better. It was the start of my recovery process in fact. Still, I think I was just ready at the time to feel the warmth in the embrace. Other times I don’t get that warmth which is a little sad. It’s definitely hard when being touched is problematic and scares you. Touch is such a strong sense and really makes you feel human. When you can’t even appreciate touch something is seriously wrong.

The catch here is that person in question who despises touch is probably yearning for it. They just don’t know how to receive it properly. They can’t handle the stimulation, they can’t handle the sense of connection they’ve been deprived of for so long. It’s mostly down to a misunderstanding of how the person should best be approached. Maybe start small like chatting to them through text. Move onto the phone which includes vocal inflections; which they might lack. Then progress to being in the same room as them which introduces body language and facial expressions. Finally gauge the moment they need a hug or just have their hand held. It’s a slow process of attunement that everyone suffering any kind of mental illness needs.

I at least seem to have huge misunderstandings between myself and women, and I think it goes both ways. For example when I was on Tinder, in which I got a surprising amount of matches I thought, I met a girl. We had a lovely time at a jazz bar. She did understand that she’d have to make the moves because I was so not in tune with the situation from inexperience but she didn’t understand she was moving too fast. Taken aback by the surrealness of taking each other’s clothes off I just felt the situation was completely out of place. But I was strong. I said to her calmly and sincerely that everything was going too fast and I just wanted to talk. So we talked all night and she figured out that it wasn’t the thing for her. But then, plot twist, I misunderstood the situation and thought there was reciprocated love. What a fool I am and I had to learn the lesson the hard way that some things just aren’t meant to be.

Finding those people in your life that you can trust is incredibly challenging. Unfortunately my network of trustworthy individuals is mostly male. I don’t know if it’s just the nature of my situation or something but I seem to be a real turn off for girls when I misunderstand the situation and think they actually care. So when push comes to shove and feelings develop it’s too much for them and they either tell me to go away or just stop talking to me entirely. This does beget a sense of disconnection and removes an important part of life. A sense of romantic love I think is incredibly important to overall well-being yet the schizophrenic, or anyone challenged by mental health issues, seem to discover that it can be a daunting challenge to get past the net of misunderstandings.

They can smell the desperation. They can detect you’re not healthy, that you’re not breeding material. Above all else, and I’ve been told this many times before, never go into a relationship thinking it will fix things. A common misunderstanding that I have to constantly remind myself of is that “No, they can’t save you, and you can’t save them.” The latter part of that sentence is important because I seem to seek out problem cases like my own because I feel broken therefore I have to find someone as broken as me. What a futile exercise.

What’s seriously challenging is trying to get others to understand your intent. When you crave to be ‘normal’ despite your vulnerabilities you tend to act desperate as described above. This desperation turns into frustration when it’s all a big misunderstanding. You don’t have any intention of just ‘getting laid,’ you dream big and of the future because you were just given a hint of hope so you’re outside interacting with the world again but they never put you down gently. For most people my age, that is in their twenties, this just isn’t their thing. Then there’s a misunderstanding on your side. You start to think nobody thinks the same way you do, or that you’ll ever find your kindred spirit. Again, a sense of disconnection and you go back into your shell, only to come back when a glimmer of hope shines down upon you or something forcefully pushes you out back into society.

There’s one thing I don’t think anyone, including myself, misunderstands and that is we’re all struggling. We for the most part can’t put two and two together. Mental health and love just being two examples. Another striking example of connection that’s often misunderstood is online friends. I played a lot of video games, especially back in my teenage years, and I made genuine friends. Friends I’ve known for over a decade now. We still talk, though I play a lot less video games and they do too. But it’s real connections in a safe place, namely behind your computer screen. Where you don’t have to take into account body language and facial expressions, just vocal inflections if you’re into voice chat. Otherwise not even that.

Still, only having online friends, which I did for four years of my life, makes your whole world a lot smaller. It’s as if there’s nothing outside the closed door of your room. You turn inwards and your mind starts to play tricks on itself. Your world is filled with disembodied voices and you yearn for those voices to recognise you. You try to act brave and just lose yourself in the game, not letting them know about the tricks your mind is playing. For all intents and purposes the people I played with for four years while suffering from acute phase schizophrenia knew nothing of my disorder. The video games centered me, they gave me a world I had control over, they gave me a reason to live and I’ll always value that. Friends, goals, ambitions, a community, I became addicted. Still I was never understood because I always put up a facade. These days I go to them for some of my problems but it always falls on deaf ears. They were never there to help in that capacity. They played video games to lose themselves in another world, not to be reminded of the real world lurking outside that closed door.

What I find amazing, and something I’ve misunderstood for many years, is that I actually have been living life and my writing I think testifies to that. People are like: “My god, how do you write so well?” Which I’m tempted to respond with: “I’ve lived a life of yearning to love but filled with fear that made me grow up in certain ways very quickly, yet in other ways not at all. I’m basically a teenager but an old soul in a twenty-something’s body.” I’ve lived my life to its fullest despite my vulnerabilities, behind closed doors.

