---
title: Each to their own
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [schizophrenia, depression, causes, symptoms]
---

The varied experiences of the mentally ill has left me with a question. How do all these people experience similar situations but encounter vastly different conditions as a result? This troubles me because it makes one wonder, what is schizophrenia, what is depression, what is mental illness in general. For all intents and purposes, what separates depression from schizophrenia. Should they essentially be treated the same? That is, with intensive psychosocial support rather than medication. Maybe medication can be a band-aid solution to manage the symptoms, but at the end of the day we need to get to the cause. Perhaps some people are more vulnerable to the pressures of life than others. It’s not a crazy idea but I think it is often forgotten that we aren’t each other. We’re not in that person’s shoes. At the end of the day we even ‘break’ in differing ways though there seems to be a pattern. But are we all yearning for the same thing?

By organic factors, such as genetics, and environmental factors, such as stress, we find that mental illness comes about. It’s almost a reaction to your environment based on fundamentally who you are. Is it your fault for having a mental illness or were you predisposed to these conditions? Naturally, the former part of this question should be invalid. Nobody wishes on themselves to be low-functioning. Leading an aimless, meaningless existence because of such things as previous trauma, perhaps not coping from the pressures of everyday life. It doesn’t make you weak for becoming mentally ill, it’s just a matter of fact that from everyday events you develop certain symptoms that come about because of the aforementioned processes. Some might develop a mood disorder, some might break from reality, some might develop obsessions and compulsions. Yet from my own experiences there’s something that makes the mentally ill progress into lower, and lower, levels of functioning. That is, there’s an organic nature to the illness, not just functional.

I was considered gifted. I was great at sports, academics, socialising, yet something triggered me back in the day because of some predisposition. My symptom profile at the time was a loss of motivation, diminished expression, your typical negative symptoms of schizophrenia. There’s definitely something organic about this process, but I can’t quite put my finger on the issue. Someone typically does not go from hero to zero just because of environmental factors. Which leads me to believe that this too is a similar experience shared by all of the mentally ill. That there’s something in our chemistry that makes us vulnerable, but not weak, just vulnerable. Yet something triggers this predisposition like the loss of a loved one, such as my case when I was fourteen. I left my mother behind and never looked back. Moving in with my father, he just couldn’t replace the role of my mother except in practical circumstances. I lost all motivation to continue. Not from grief, or worry, or regret because I had made the decision to leave my mother behind, yet there was something fundamentally missing from my life as a result.

When the jigsaw doesn’t fit together, problems obviously crop up. Just something as little as leaving my mother behind caused me to turn inwards. Into a world of my own design. Slowly disconnecting from reality. Or that’s what I suppose. Perhaps it wasn’t that trigger specifically, but I have a strong inclination that losing a loved one is devastating on the psyche. That was my experience anyways. There was an organic factor to my illness which was a predisposition to be immensely affected by little things. These little things add up so easily. Yet I continued onwards, not depressed or anything, but I began to lose my motivation. Some people, and this is where the varied experience comes in, get sad, depressed even. Not me, I continued to plod and be generally happy despite adversity, despite myself attacking itself. Yet I couldn’t convey this emotion to anyone. It’s akin to an autoimmune disease in that way. So, my world of my own design started to get smaller, and smaller, as I played more, and more, video games. As previously mentioned, I wasn’t sad doing this. In fact, it ended up being my ‘safe place,’ my ‘happy place.’ Away from the world and all its pressures. This was my experience, yet yours could pronounce itself in entirely differently ways, and that’s entirely valid.

I understand what it means to be sad, to be depressed, because that’s entirely human. To be sad doesn’t have to be pathological. However, there’s something off I always say when my symptoms present like depression yet I’m generally happy. I’ll go on stints of playing video games for six months straight and interact online as a social butterfly. Yet bring me into the ‘real world’ and I’ll shut down. Monosyllabic speech, latency in responses, slow movements. It’s like I’ve nearly detached from reality. This is just how my symptoms present, and there’s nothing wrong with that. I’m not sure what it’s like to be depressed for long periods of time, and that’s valid too. I’m not you, I don’t have your experiences, or your symptom profile. What I’m trying to say is “that’s okay.”  It’s okay that we present differently despite experiencing similar situations. That’s what makes us unique. Like, for example, someone is going to read this paper like somebody else. They might have a wildly different interpretations from somebody else, yet there’s patterns.

One pattern I’ve noticed is the generations. My parents’ generation is unlike our generation. My parents for example never speak of their traumas. It’s “shut up and carry on” for the most part. Yet my generation, the millennials (me being twenty-eight this year) have learnt a certain means of explaining our traumas to each other for the most part, or that’s what I like to think. Perhaps I live in a world where people are more open about their problems because I tend to do the same. “This is my story” so to speak. We might even be proud at the end of the day from what we’ve been through after coming to peace with it. But first comes the healing from sharing your story. Perhaps this is a call to action to everyone. Please, share your story, the world needs to know.
Another pattern is gender, or perhaps lack thereof. Men for example statistically develop schizophrenia more than women, while women tend to develop depression more than men. It’s as if the primary coping mechanism for men is a ‘predilection for fantasy over reality.’ While for women the primary coping mechanism is to be ‘real, all too real.’ There’s a tendency for the depressed person to have a far too realistic image of themselves. There could very well be a tendency for men to develop grandiose or persecutory delusions. I’m not saying that women don’t get schizophrenia, or that men don’t develop depression. It’s just an interesting statistic that I wanted to analyse. Finally, socioeconomic class is an interesting pattern as well. Mental illness tends to not discriminate between affluence and higher socioeconomic status. Even the most well-off person in the world can get depressed.

It’s these statistics and similarities that really tell us a bit about ourselves. How we’re predisposed to certain conditions based on what time we live in, where we live, and some physical characteristics such as initial gender. I find it fascinating, yet what my thesis here is trying to say is that despite similarities in genetics and environmental factors a sort of soup is created. Mixed with all the finest ingredients. That soup is you. As previously stated, despite similarities in experience like going to the same school as your peers, living in the same neighbourhood, being a similar age, and for some of your peers, being a similar gender, you end up developing symptoms of mental illness because of some differing variables such as genetics and family situations. Just small tweaks to the formula can send someone off the straight and narrow and into a depressive or psychotic breakdown.

Yet what I’m trying to get at here is “that’s okay.” Unfortunately, you might need some concessions in life to get through because of genetics, your family situation, your socioeconomic class, your race, your gender. All these things add up to complete the picture, and I could list many more. Mental illness does not discriminate. Yet, I think we have a way to go before mental illness is ‘cured.’ By that I mean mental illness, or more specifically, inappropriate behaviours or reactions to your life circumstance, will vanish as we understand not only its cause—which I have a sneaking suspicion is caused by a lack of connectivity amongst ourselves—but we understand each other better. Once we understand that a depression or psychotic breakdown is a natural response to a situation gone awry, then, only then, will we be able to empathise with that person and for the healing to begin.

We don’t have the proper emotional education to be able to eradicate mental illness for good. As long as we treat symptoms rather than causes, treating mental illness will be like treating cancer. Ad-hoc treatment plans depending on the person rather than the connection to the community and the world at large they deserve. Intensive psychosocial treatment, that is someone coming to your home, helping you with your daily needs, and putting goals in place, I think is the only solution. Yet it costs money, far too much money compared to “popping a pill.” Society has deemed it appropriate to let each of us suffer, to have our inappropriate behaviours subdued through pharmaceuticals because it’s the easy way out of a ‘plague on society.’ All we need to realise though is that we’re similar in that we’re social creatures. What we also need to realise is that what makes each of us ‘tick’ can be vastly different. That the surface facing coping mechanisms, be that depression, psychosis, have at you, can be vastly different, yet inside I think what we all want can be very similar.

