---
title: A myth of our own making
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [schizophrenia, history, recovery]
---

We’ talked about Bleuler’s four A’s before. Though in reading ‘A Critical History of Schizophrenia’ (McNally, 2016), and ‘Eugen Bleuler's Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias (1911): A Centenary Appreciation and Reconsideration,’ (Moskowitz, Heim, 2011) I’ve come to learn that the concept of the four A’s is mostly a result of interpreting Bleuler incorrectly. Bleuler for example would go backwards and forwards on what he considered the (1) fundamental (i.e., particularly characteristic of schizophrenia) and accessory (shared with other disorders), and (2) primary (directly due to an assumed organic deficit), and secondary (developing as a result of the primary disturbance—these included delusions and hallucinations) symptoms of schizophrenia. I now know that I fall into the Bleulerian school rather than the neo-Kraepelinian school. The Bleulerian school is mostly concerned with cognitive and negative symptoms while the neo-Kraepelinian school is mostly concerned with psychotic features. We’ve now come to learn that psychotic features are present in a range of disorders and aren’t specific to schizophrenia. As mentioned, one could even call delusions and hallucinations secondary symptoms in the Bleulerian school of thought.

The four A’s are traditionally known as blunted affect, loosening of associations, ambivalence, and autism. In an article titled ‘Notes on the History of Schizophrenia’ we find:

> It was Bleuler who first coined the divisive term ‘schizophrenia’ in [1908]. Bleuler defined schizophrenia with his four “A’s,” referring to the blunted Affect (diminished emotional response to stimuli); loosening of Associations (by which he meant a disordered pattern of thought, inferring a cognitive deficit), Ambivalence (an apparent inability to make decisions, again suggesting a deficit of the integration and processing of incident and retrieved information) and Autism (a loss of awareness of external events, and a preoccupation with the self and one’s own thoughts). Bleuler was also the first to describe the symptoms as “positive” or “negative.” (Kyziridis, 2005)

It’s these four A’s from the Bleuler school that would guide psychiatric diagnostic procedures until the rise of Schneider’s ‘first-rank’ symptoms, namely:

1.	Hearing one’s thoughts spoken aloud
2.	Auditory hallucinations commenting on one’s own behaviour
3.	Thought withdrawal, insertion and broadcasting
4.	Somatic hallucinations, or the experience of one’s thoughts as being controlled or influenced by outside.

This gave rise to the neo-Kraepelinian school of thought in which psychotic features were basically mandatory for a diagnosis of schizophrenia; however, a large number of ‘secondary’ symptoms, such as cognitive deficits and negative symptoms, could also lead to a diagnosis. The neo-Kraepelinian school would be the driving force behind the DSM-III’s and DSM-IV’s conceptions of schizophrenia, which I’m about to refute.

It’s now believed that the four A’s, namely affect, ambivalence, association, and autism should be reinterpreted. That is, only loosening of associations was considered both a fundamental and primary symptom of schizophrenia by Bleuler. That is, it was both functional and organic. This gives schizophrenia a sort of ‘disease of language’ feel to it. An important step forward I believe in our interpretation of what schizophrenia actually is. With loosening of associations as its fundamental and primary symptom, perhaps we can further distinguish schizophrenia from other psychotic disorders; psychosis not being a good enough signifier of schizophrenia in particular. However, by its very name, schizophrenia (literally “split mind”) is characterised by a ‘splitting of the psychic functions’ according to Bleuler. In this sense he held his concept of ‘splitting’ and ‘loosening of associations’ in very high regard in terms of his formulation of schizophrenia. I don’t quite get this idea entirely of ‘splitting’ myself, but it’s deemed appropriate to frame it as a form of dissociation. This fundamental symptom of ‘splitting’ literally detaches the schizophrenic from reality, and as a result, delusions and hallucinations, secondary symptoms in the Bleulerian school, manifest in extreme cases. These delusions and hallucinations seem to also be symptoms of the core deficit, a loosening of associations. We can go further in this analysis with well-established schizophrenic researchers claiming:

> Psychotic experience is to the diagnosis of mental illness as fever is to the diagnosis of infection – important, but non-decisive in differential diagnosis.

So maybe we’re missing the point of all this? Perhaps cognitive and negative symptoms are the core symptoms of schizophrenia. Yet I know from talking to other schizophrenics they describe their illness through the frame of delusions and hallucinations. Who’s right? I would like to examine my own experiences in this new light.

To me, the most debilitating aspect of schizophrenia are the cognitive and negative symptoms. I’m in agreement with the Bleulerian school in that loosening of associations is a fundamental and primary symptom of schizophrenia. What I affectionately called, in retrospect, my ‘Wikipedia word soup.’ I would jump from one topic to another, a train of thought that simply didn’t let my listener follow. I was so dissociated I didn’t even notice that my listener was simply nodding to me, staring blankly with glazed over eyes, I would begin to explain why my mathematical formula for the universe made sense. As a contrived, made up example, because my memory is fragmented and honestly ‘shot,’ we have: “Because of the static and dynamic dichotomy present in the universe, as determined by my philosophy of mind, we find that we can explain the world mathematically because of the concept that everything is governed by Thought (note the capital ‘T’), my secular religion, …,” and so on. You can imagine not a lot of people get what I was trying to say but in my head it all made sense. It wasn’t a thought disorder per say, it was a disorder of language, how I expressed myself. There was something ‘split’ in my mind between how I viewed the world and how I presented my thoughts to others.

Another aspect of the Bleulerian school that I agree with is this idea of fundamental symptoms such as disturbances of association, as previously presented, and affectivity, the predilection of fantasy as against reality, and the inclination to divorce oneself from reality. This blunted affect and disconnect from reality have been the mainstays of my illness since its conception when I was fourteen. So, in summary, I believe the fundamental symptoms described above, which are described as cognitive and negative symptoms these days, are the defining, characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia. In ‘Negative Symptoms and Cognitive Impairments in Schizophrenia: Two Key Symptoms Negatively Influencing Social Functioning’ (Kaneko, 2018) it’s discussed that the negative symptoms can be categorised into two main clusters, namely diminished expression (reduced behaviours related to the expression of emotion) and avolition (loss of behaviours, interests, motivation, and desires). These can be further split into the five domains of negative symptoms, namely (blunted) affect (reduced intensity and range of emotional expression shown in verbal or non-verbal modes of communication), alogia (reduced quantity of speech and loss of conversation fluency), amotivation (deficits in the initiation and maintenance of goal-oriented behaviours), anhedonia (impaired anticipation of reward), and asociality (diminished interest in social interactions with others). I can vouch for experiencing all the above as either stated by others or through subjective experience. Typically, the first cluster, diminished expression, is an objective thing where I need a third-party to notify me of deficits in how I talk and what emotions I display, or lack thereof. However, the second cluster, avolition, is a deeply subjective experience. I have absolutely no motivation. The reward centre in my brain is hard wired to play video games or some other inane past time, nothing goal-directed or working towards something. Finally, I’ll just not care about interacting with people in the real world, preferring online interaction a lot more. These are my characteristic negative symptoms. They are subtle but pervasive.

What we’ve learnt is that the Bleulerian school dictates that a ‘splitting,’ or some type of dissociation occurs, in schizophrenia along with a loosening of associations. Lost in a world of one’s own design with the inability to convey one’s true meaning in the acute phase of the illness. The ‘splitting’ of the psychic functions, now that I think about it, occurs across the course of the illness. The ‘modern’ negative symptoms, which could be considered either fundamental or accessory, primary or secondary, occurs because of this dissociation. This disconnect from reality. The neo-Kraepelinian school however dictates that psychosis is the primary symptom. Yet because of psychosis being prevalent in a range of disorders, I agree with the Bleulerian school that delusions and hallucinations are secondary symptoms. That is, they’re not required for a diagnosis of schizophrenia. What I would suggest then is that a loosening of associations in the acute phase of the disease process with negative symptoms in the prodromal, acute, and residual phases of the illness are the primary markers that someone is experiencing schizophrenia. Quite different from today’s conception of schizophrenia but historically accurate.

But this leaves an important question, what do we do about schizophrenia if it’s not primarily psychotic? I’m glad you asked! Basically, there has to be a shift away from “popping a pill” and more emphasis on psychosocial treatment techniques. Psychosocial treatment, from the ‘Harvard Medical School,’ typically revolves around education, psychotherapy, behavioural training, and help with employment, housing, and family relations. Supportive therapy offers reassurance, morale building, companionship, common-sense advice, and help with practical problems. This is what the schizophrenic, and the mentally ill in general, need to progress with their lives. To ditch the maladaptive coping mechanisms such as ‘splitting.’ The world of the schizophrenic is a myth of their own making resulting from dissociation. Someone needs to bring them back to reality and show them that the world is honestly not the scary place it’s made out to be.
