---
title: Coffee, cigarettes, and a bottle of pills
layout: post
author: jeffi
tags: [recovery, addiction, mental illness, schizophrenia, essay]
---

Coffee, cigarettes, and a bottle of pills. The elegant weapons in the arsenal of a recovering addict and the mentally ill. The “Mental Health Survival Kit” so to say. Coffee for that buzz, cigarettes to centre yourself, and some Valium to take away the anxiety or to detox. Addiction is like a treadmill, you’re continuously looking for your next fix, again and again. Not only is it tiring in and of itself, addiction seems to be highly comorbid with other mental health issues. This is my story that starts with cannabis, flirts with other drugs, and ends with alcohol.

At the age of seventeen I had my first cone. My friends had seen the absolutely sorry state I had been in the last few years because of my prodromal phase schizophrenia, unbeknownst to us at the time, and wanted me to be happy. Near instantaneous relief from all my negative symptoms! I was shocked. I felt the love again, I felt connected to the world, I basked in its glory. For a time, I was happy but the high drifted away and eventually I’d need that high again. Everything starts slowly, ever so slowly. The subtle nature of addiction, the way it takes hold, is cruel in a sense. It offers some relief from that crazy world out there only to replace that with a living nightmare. A nightmare in which you’re “Fucked up, Insecure, Neurotic, and Emotional” (FINE). It’s not pleasant being FINE, FINE is not optimal by any stretch of the imagination.

Perhaps my drug and alcohol counsellors were right, perhaps it is all about trauma. Developing a ‘window of tolerance’ to be able to handle the punches and kicks the world throws at you. The window of tolerance, hypo- and hyperarousal, and all that implies. But it got me questioning: “Am I mentally ill or just an addict? Why not both?” I guess given the blurry line between the two I’ll never know what I really am. Alas, I wasn’t a very good consumer. Threatened with additional episodes of psychosis if I kept up my drug abusing antics, I had a mental breakdown remembering the trauma of my previous episodes of psychosis. Not pleasant.

Back to the story at hand. It started small. Smoking cannabis with my brother, watching him play video games, playing a bit of “Call of Duty” zombies. It was the good life. But then something changed one day, something snapped. I took the cannabis from his room, which was for all intents and purposes mine because I paid for it, but we shared it, and went into my room and started isolating myself to the extreme. Before that fateful day I at least interacted with my brother, even if I was out of work and had no other friends. It was that day that I solidified the rest of my young adult life. A young adult life that would get blown up in smoke.

For years I slowly increased my intake until I was smoking an ounce of cannabis a week. My record was an ounce in three days. That’s spinning as well so 50-50 tobacco and cannabis. I would slowly go out of my mind smoking that much cannabis. I laughed the day, rather inappropriately, when the doctor told me you couldn’t get addicted to cannabis after being admitted. He just had no idea about the extent of my abuse. He did a shocking job putting in the cannula that day as well. Screw that guy, I needed Valium for my anxiety of being away from my ‘medication.’

Years and years of abuse and my mind couldn’t handle all this cannabis, let alone the isolation. Hallucinations, delusions, thought disorder, you name it. ‘Wikipedia word soup’ was my later thought up cute name for my derailment and word salad at the time. I was an avid reader, film buff, a gamer, but most of all, a philosopher at heart. I used to read every Wikipedia page for every philosopher under the sun. Be that Plato, Kant, Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard, Camus, ha etc. I came up with elaborate theories and devious plots to take over the scholarly world. Most importantly I studied to find a way out, to figure out the big questions. To this day I’ll never know if I was schizophrenic or a drug addict. Can you hallucinate, become delusional, and develop a chronic cognitive deficit just from cannabis? The research says you need to be predisposed to schizophrenia for such an effect. I tend to agree with the research.
It took three months in hospital on my third visit to get me off cannabis. The fog cleared, I was ‘back;’ well as back as you can be after ravaging your mind and body for so long. I was never quite the same since. A bit weird and eccentric, with chronic emotional dysregulation, avolition, apathy, and the elaborate theories and devious plots lingered, for a time at least. It was a process of forgetting and moving on. To this day these drug-filled hazes which I called ‘days’ back then remain fragmented memories and are nonlinear in nature, almost like a dream.

I don’t like calling myself an addict. Addicts get treated worse than trash. I’d prefer to be mentally ill, if anything, though coming back over the story I don’t think it’s that simple. It’s with surprising frequency that mental health issues and addiction creep into the picture together. They feed off one another, they propagate one another, they’re like a parasite that eventually destroys the host. Anyhow, out with the old and in with the new. Alcohol was my poison of choice this time with a dabbling of some harder stuff like ketamine, mushrooms, cocaine, and acid. Surprisingly the ‘harder stuff’ had next to no effect on my overall well-being. In fact, acid for example probably improved my overall well-being the one time I tried it. I turned to my new friend during the trip and said to her “It’s nice to have a positive psychotic experience, you know what I mean?” I muttered with a giggle. She looked shocked after I explained that I had been psychotic in the past and handling acid so well. I felt a negative-style psychosis actually makes you more readily able to just flow with the acid trip.

Alcohol and cigarettes though, those nefarious substances yet a perfect replacement for a cannabis addiction. So easily available, and in alcohol’s case, so quick to get tipsy, then the emotions hit and you’re a bloody wreck. For over half a decade I would drink daily with my intake getting upwards of two to three litres of wine a night. Sometimes I’d have a drink upon awakening, we call it an ‘eye-opener’ in the biz. What really irks me though is that for the most part the Australian culture thought my daily drinking wasn’t that bad, at least compared to cannabis, at least that’s what I thought. I’d drink my life away, wasting countless days and nights of my life as alcohol destroyed me. I lost my job many times as a result of being too wasted to work. So, to SMART Recovery I went, which is like a secular version of Alcoholics Anonymous, and met people with the same struggles with addiction.
It’s comforting being in the same room with a bunch of people sharing real stories of addiction; I wish there was a similar service for mental health. You get five minutes of allotted time to talk about your week, and anything relating to that week, then you talk about your goals for the next week. Using SMART Recovery, I reduced my alcohol intake from two to three litres of wine a night to just social occasions. Even at the social occasions I would get tipsy rather than drunk. This was a huge boon to my well-being and allowed me to manage my underlying schizophrenia a lot better. Alas, the negative symptoms still came on strong. Unfortunately, I only went to SMART Recovery for a month or two. Once I was ‘recovered’ I got out of there as soon as I could, even if I did make friends. The negative symptoms were also making me adverse to social interactions, I lost the motivation to leave the house and subsequently couldn’t make it to SMART Recovery meetings. People still messaged me from the SMART Recovery meetings asking if I was going yet I couldn’t even handle the idea of sending a response, it was just too much.

So here I am, relapsed to an extent and the journey continues. Backwards and forwards, side to side, in a nonlinear fashion I recover. I sit here right now enjoying a beer in the early morning after being woken up by high blood glucose. The mental health team isn’t impressed that I’m drinking again but their drugs don’t work, they just make things worse. Beer offers some rest and relaxation that I’d expect from the pharmaceuticals, but who’s going to prescribe a depressant. It’s been a long journey indeed, a journey I’m still taking through my addiction riddled mess of a self. At the end of the day the mental illness and addiction interact with each other. Being a schizophrenic is stressful and to just get to the end of the day to have a beer means the world to me. It’s not a cost-effective means of medicating myself but it’s proven to work time and time again. Perhaps the title should be “Coffee, alcohol, cigarettes, and a bottle of pills” yet I can’t bring myself to say that alcohol is in my ‘survival kit.’ I don’t need it to survive, it’s just nice you know. To get to the end of that day, to have that beer, to sit back and pump out some words.

